<h1>THE RED ROOM</h1>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>



<h4><i>BY THE SAME AUTHOR</i></h4>

<h2>IN MIDSUMMER DAYS</h2>

<h4><i>5/&mdash; nett</i></h4>


<div class="center">"Strindberg at his cleverest and best,<br />
and those who are interested in his
work<br /> should make a point of getting<br />
the book."&mdash;<i>The Observer.</i></div>

<p><br /><br /><br /></p>
<p><br /><br /><br /></p>


<h3>THE<br /></h3>
<h1>RED ROOM<br /></h1>
<p><br /></p>
<h5>BY</h5>
<h3>AUGUST STRINDBERG</h3>
<p><br /><br /></p>
<div class="center">AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION<br />
BY ELLIE SCHLEUSSNER<br /></div>
<p><br /><br /><br /></p>
<div class="center">LONDON: HOWARD LATIMER. LTD<br />
 GREAT QUEEN STREET, KINGSWAY<br />
 MCMXIII<br /><br /><br /></div>




<div class="center"><span class="smcap">Printed by<br />
Ballantyne &amp; Company<br />
London ltd</span><br /></div>


<p class="break"></p>


<h2>CONTENTS</h2>







<div class="center">
<table border="0" cellpadding="4" cellspacing="0" summary="">
<tr><td align="left"  colspan='2'>CHAP.</td><td align="right">PAGE</td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">I. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">A Bird's-Eye View of Stockholm</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_I">1</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">II. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Between Brothers</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_II">15</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">III. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">The Artists' Colony</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_III">24</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">IV. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Master and Dogs</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_IV">38</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">V. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">At the Publisher's</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_V">59</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">VI. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">The Red Room</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_VI">70</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">VII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">The Imitation of Christ</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_VII">87</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">VIII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Poor Mother Country</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_VIII">94</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">IX. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Bills of Exchange</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_IX">107</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">X. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">The Newspaper Syndicate "Grey Bonnet" </span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_X">113</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XI. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Happy People</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XI">124</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Marine Insurance Society "Triton" </span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XII">135</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XIII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Divine Ordinance</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XIII">146</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XIV. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Absinth</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XIV">156</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XV. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">The Theatrical Company "Ph&oelig;nix" </span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XV">169</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XVI. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">In the White Mountains</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XVI">182</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XVII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Natura....</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XVII">197</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XVIII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Nihilism</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XVIII">201</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XIX. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">From Churchyard to Public-House</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XIX">212</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XX. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">On the Altar</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XX">226</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXI. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">A Soul Overboard</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXI">232</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Hard Times</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXII">239</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXIII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Audiences</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXIII">247</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXIV. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">On Sweden</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXIV">254</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXV. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Checkmate</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXV">273</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXVI. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Correspondence</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXVI">290</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXVII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Recovery</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXVII">299</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXVIII. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">From Beyond the Grave</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXVIII">304</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXIX. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Revue</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXIX">314</a></td></tr>
<tr><td align="right">XXX. &nbsp;</td><td align="left"><span class="smcap">Epilogue</span></td><td align="right"><a href="#CHAPTER_XXX">324</a></td></tr>
</table></div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[1]</span></p>

<p class="break"></p>

<h2><a name="CHAPTER_I" id="CHAPTER_I"></a>CHAPTER I</h2>

<h3>A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF STOCKHOLM</h3>


 <p>It was an evening in the beginning of May. The little garden on "Moses
 Height," on the south side of the town had not yet been thrown open to
 the public, and the flower-beds were still unturned. The snowdrops had
 worked through the accumulations of last year's dead leaves, and were
 on the point of closing their short career and making room for the
 crocuses which had found shelter under a barren pear tree; the elder
 was waiting for a southerly wind before bursting into bloom, but the
 tightly closed buds of the limes still offered cover for love-making to
 the chaffinches, busily employed in building their lichen-covered nests
 between trunk and branch. No human foot had trod the gravel paths since
 last winter's snow had melted, and the free and easy life of beasts and
 flowers was left undisturbed. The sparrows industriously collected all
 manner of rubbish, and stowed it away under the tiles of the Navigation
 School. They burdened themselves with scraps of the rocket-cases of
 last autumn's fireworks, and picked the straw covers off the young
 trees, transplanted from the nursery in the Deer Park only a year
 ago&mdash; nothing escaped them. They discovered shreds of muslin in
 the summer arbours; the splintered leg of a seat supplied them with
 tufts of hair left on the battlefield by dogs which had not been
 fighting there since Josephine's day. What a life it was!</p>

<p>The sun was standing over the Liljeholm, throwing
sheaves of rays towards the east; they pierced the<span class="pagenum">[2]</span>
columns of smoke of Bergsund, flashed across the
Riddarfjörd, climbed to the cross of the Riddarholms
church, flung themselves on to the steep roof of the
German church opposite, toyed with the bunting
displayed by the boats on the pontoon bridge,
sparkled in the windows of the chief custom-house,
illuminated the woods of the Liding Island, and died
away in a rosy cloud far, far away in the distance
where the sea was. And from thence the wind came
and travelled back by the same way, over Vaxholm,
past the fortress, past the custom-house and along
the Sikla Island, forcing its way in behind the
Hästarholm, glancing at the summer resorts; then
out again and on, on to the hospital Daniken; there
it took fright and dashed away in a headlong career
along the southern shore, noticed the smell of coal,
tar and fish-oil, came dead against the city quay,
rushed up to Moses Height, swept into the garden
and buffeted against a wall.</p>

<p>The wall was opened by a maid-servant, who, at
the very moment, was engaged in peeling off the
paper pasted over the chinks of the double windows;
a terrible smell of dripping, beer dregs, pine needles,
and sawdust poured out and was carried away by
the wind, while the maid stood breathing the fresh
air through her nostrils. It plucked the cotton-wool,
strewn with barberry berries, tinsel and rose leaves,
from the space between the windows and danced it
along the paths, joined by sparrows and chaffinches
who saw here the solution of the greater part of their
housing problem.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, the maid continued her work at the
double windows; in a few minutes the door leading
from the restaurant stood open, and a man, well but
plainly dressed, stepped out into the garden. There
was nothing striking about his face beyond a slight
expression of care and worry which disappeared as
soon as he had emerged from the stuffy room and
caught sight of the wide horizon. He turned to the
side from whence the wind came, opened his overcoat,<span class="pagenum">[3]</span>
and repeatedly drew a deep breath which seemed
to relieve his heart and lungs. Then he began to
stroll up and down the barrier which separated the
garden from the cliffs in the direction of the sea.</p>

<p>Far below him lay the noisy, reawakening town;
the steam cranes whirred in the harbour, the iron
bars rattled in the iron weighing machine, the
whistles of the lock-keepers shrilled, the steamers at
the pontoon bridge smoked, the omnibuses rumbled
over the uneven paving-stones; noise and uproar
in the fish market, sails and flags on the water outside;
the screams of the sea-gulls, bugle-calls from the
dockyard, the turning out of the guard, the clattering
of the wooden shoes of the working-men&mdash;all this
produced an impression of life and bustle, which
seemed to rouse the young man's energy; his face
assumed an expression of defiance, cheerfulness and
resolution, and as he leaned over the barrier and
looked at the town below, he seemed to be watching
an enemy; his nostrils expanded, his eyes flashed,
and he raised his clenched fist as if he were challenging
or threatening the poor town.</p>

<p>The bells of St. Catherine's chimed seven; the
splenetic treble of St. Mary's seconded; the basses
of the great church, and the German church joined
in, and soon the air was vibrating with the sound
made by the seven bells of the town; then one after
the other relapsed into silence, until far away in the
distance only the last one of them could be heard
singing its peaceful evensong; it had a higher note,
a purer tone and a quicker tempo than the others&mdash;yes,
it had! He listened and wondered whence the
sound came, for it seemed to stir up vague memories
in him. All of a sudden his face relaxed and his
features expressed the misery of a forsaken child.
And he was forsaken; his father and mother were
lying in the churchyard of St. Clara's, from whence
the bell could still be heard; and he was a child;
he still believed in everything, truth and fairy tales
alike.<span class="pagenum">[4]</span></p>

<p>The bell of St. Clara's was silent, and the sound of
footsteps on the gravel path roused him from his
reverie. A short man with side-whiskers came towards
him from the verandah; he wore spectacles,
apparently more for the sake of protecting his glances
than his eyes, and his malicious mouth was generally
twisted into a kindly, almost benevolent, expression.
He was dressed in a neat overcoat with defective
buttons, a somewhat battered hat, and trousers
hoisted at half-mast. His walk indicated assurance
as well as timidity. His whole appearance was so
indefinite that it was impossible to guess at his
age or social position. He might just as well have
been an artisan as a government official; his age
was anything between twenty-nine and forty-five
years. He was obviously flattered to find himself
in the company of the man whom he had come to
meet, for he raised his bulging hat with unusual
ceremony and smiled his kindliest smile.</p>

<p>"I hope you haven't been waiting, assessor?"</p>

<p>"Not for a second; it's only just struck seven.
Thank you for coming. I must confess that this
meeting is of the greatest importance to me; I might
almost say it concerns my whole future, Mr. Struve."</p>

<p>"Bless me! Do you mean it?"</p>

<p>Mr. Struve blinked; he had come to drink a glass
of toddy and was very little inclined for a serious
conversation. He had his reasons for that.</p>

<p>"We shall be more undisturbed if we have our toddy
outside, if you don't mind," continued the assessor.</p>

<p>Mr. Struve stroked his right whisker, put his hat
carefully on his head and thanked the assessor for his
invitation; but he looked uneasy.</p>

<p>"To begin with, I must ask you to drop the
'assessor,'" began the young man. "I've never
been more than a regular assistant, and I cease to be
even that from to-day; I'm Mr. Falk, nothing else."</p>

<p>"What?"</p>

<p>Mr. Struve looked as if he had lost a distinguished
friend, but he kept his temper.<span class="pagenum">[5]</span></p>

<p>"You're a man with liberal tendencies...."</p>

<p>Mr. Struve tried to explain himself, but Falk
continued:</p>

<p>"I asked you to meet me here in your character
of contributor to the liberal <i>Red Cap</i>."</p>

<p>"Good heavens! I'm such a very unimportant
contributor...."</p>

<p>"I've read your thundering articles on the working
man's question, and all other questions which nearly
concern us. We're in the year three, in Roman
figures, for it is now the third year of the new
Parliament, and soon our hopes will have become
realities. I've read your excellent biographies of our
leading politicians in the <i>Peasant's Friend</i>, the
lives of those men of the people, who have at last been
allowed to voice what oppressed them for so long;
you're a man of progress and I've a great respect for
you."</p>

<p>Struve, whose eyes had grown dull instead of
kindling at the fervent words, seized with pleasure
the proffered safety-valve.</p>

<p>"I must admit," he said eagerly, "that I'm
immensely pleased to find myself appreciated by a
young and&mdash;I must say it&mdash;excellent man like you,
assessor; but, on the other hand, why talk of such
grave, not to say sad things, when we're sitting
here, in the lap of nature, on the first day of spring,
while all the buds are bursting and the sun is pouring
his warmth on the whole creation! Let's snap our
fingers at care and drink our glass in peace. Excuse
me&mdash;I believe I'm your senior&mdash;and&mdash;I venture&mdash;to
propose therefore...."</p>

<p>Falk, who like a flint had gone out in search of steel,
realized that he had struck wood. He accepted the
proposal without eagerness. And the new brothers
sat side by side, and all they had to tell each
other was the disappointment expressed in their
faces.</p>

<p>"I mentioned a little while ago," Falk resumed,
"that I've broken to-day with my past life and<span class="pagenum">[ 6]</span>
thrown up my career as a government employé.
I'll only add that I intend taking up literature."</p>

<p>"Literature? Good Heavens! Why? Oh, but
that <i>is</i> a pity!"</p>

<p>"It isn't; but I want you to tell me how to set
about finding work."</p>

<p>"H'm! That's really difficult to say. The profession
is crowded with so many people of all sorts.
But you mustn't think of it. It really is a pity to
spoil your career; the literary profession is a bad
one."</p>

<p>Struve looked sorry, but he could not hide a certain
satisfaction at having met a friend in misfortune.</p>

<p>"But tell me," he continued, "Why are you throwing
up a career which promises a man honours as
well as influence?"</p>

<p>"Honours to those who have usurped the power,
and influence to the most unscrupulous."</p>

<p>"Stuff! It isn't really as bad as all that?"</p>

<p>"Isn't it? Well, then I must speak more plainly.
I'll show you the inner working of one of the six
departments for which I had put down. The first
five I left at once for the very simple reason that
there was no room for me. Whenever I went and
asked whether there was anything for me to do, I
was told No! And I never saw anybody doing anything.
And that was in the busy departments, like
the Committee on Brandy Distilleries, the Direct
Taxation Office and The Board of Administration of
Employés' Pensions. But when I noticed the swarming
crowd of officials, the idea struck me that the
department which had to pay out all the salaries
must surely be very busy indeed. I therefore put
my name down for the Board of Payment of Employés'
Salaries."</p>

<p>"And did you go there?" asked Struve, beginning
to feel interested.</p>

<p>"Yes. I shall never forget the great impression
made on me by my visit to this thoroughly well-organized
department. I went there at eleven<span class="pagenum">[7]</span>
o'clock one morning, because this is supposed to be
the time when the offices open. In the waiting-room
I found two young messengers sprawling on a table,
on their stomachs, reading the <i>Fatherland</i>."</p>

<p>"The '<i>Fatherland</i>'?"</p>

<p>Struve, who had up to the present been feeding
the sparrows with sugar, pricked up his ears.</p>

<p>"Yes. I said 'good morning.' A feeble wriggling
of the gentlemen's backs indicated that they accepted
my good morning without any decided displeasure;
one of them even went to the length of waggling the
heel of his right foot, which might have been intended
as a substitute for a handshake. I asked whether
either of the gentlemen were disengaged and could
show me the offices. Both of them declared that
they were unable to do so, because their orders were
not to leave the waiting-room. I inquired whether
there were any other messengers. Yes, there were
others. But the chief messenger was away on a
holiday; the first messenger was on leave; the
second was not on duty; the third had gone to the
post; the fourth was ill; the fifth had gone to fetch
some drinking water; the sixth was in the yard
'where he remained all day long'; moreover, no
official ever arrived before one o'clock. This was a
hint to me that my early, inconvenient visit was not
good form, and at the same time a reminder that the
messengers, also, were government employés.</p>

<p>"But when I stated that I was firmly resolved on
seeing the offices, so as to gain an idea of the division
of labour in so important and comprehensive a
department, the younger of the two consented to
come with me. When he opened the door I had a
magnificent view of a suite of sixteen rooms of various
sizes. There must be work here, I thought, congratulating
myself on my happy idea of coming.
The crackling of sixteen birchwood fires in sixteen
tiled stoves interrupted in the pleasantest manner
the solitude of the place."</p>

<p>Struve, who had become more and more interested<span class="pagenum">[8]</span>
fumbled for a pencil between the material and lining
of his waistcoat, and wrote "16" on his left cuff.</p>

<p>"'This is the adjuncts' room,' explained the
messenger.</p>

<p>"'I see! Are there many adjuncts in this department?'
I asked.</p>

<p>"'Oh, yes! More than enough!'"</p>

<p>"'What do they do all day long?'"</p>

<p>"'Oh! They write, of course, a little....'"</p>

<p>"He was speaking familiarly, so that I thought it
time to interrupt him. After wandering through the
copyists', the notaries', the clerk's, the controller's
and his secretary's, the reviser's and his secretary's,
the public prosecutor's, the registrar of the exchequer's,
the master of the rolls' and the librarian's,
the treasurer's, the cashier's, the procurator's, the
protonotary's, the keeper of the minutes', the
actuary's, the keeper of the records', the secretary's,
the first clerk's, and the head of the department's
rooms, we came to a door which bore in gilt letters the
words: 'The President.' I was going to open the
door but the messenger stopped me; genuinely
uneasy, he seized my arm and whispered: 'Shsh!'&mdash;'Is
he asleep?' I asked, my thoughts busy with
an old rumour. 'For God's sake, be quiet! No one
may enter here unless the president rings the bell.'
'Does he often ring?' 'No, I've never heard him
ringing in my time, and I've been here twelve
months.' He was again inclined to be familiar, so
I said no more.</p>

<p>"About noon the adjuncts began to arrive, and to
my amazement I found in them nothing but old
friends from the Committee on Brandy Distilleries,
and the Board of Administration of Employés'
Pensions. My amazement grew when the registrar
from the Inland Revenue Office strolled into the
actuary's room, and made himself as comfortable in
his easy-chair as he used to do in the Inland Revenue
Office.</p>

<p>"I took one of the young men aside and asked him<span class="pagenum">[9]</span>
whether it would not be advisable for me to call on
the president. 'Shsh!' was his mysterious reply,
while he took me into room No. 8. Again this
mysterious shsh!</p>

<p>"The room which we had just entered was quite as
dark as the rest of them, but it was much dirtier.
The horsehair stuffing was bursting through the
leather covering of the furniture; thick dust lay on
the writing-table; by the side of an inkstand, in
which the ink had dried long ago, lay an unused
stick of sealing-wax with the former owner's name
marked on it in Anglo-Saxon letters; in addition
there was a pair of paper shears whose blades were
held together by rust; a date rack which had not
been turned since midsummer five years ago; a
State directory five years old; a sheet of blotting-paper
with Julius Cæsar, Julius Cæsar, Julius Cæsar
written all over it, a hundred times at least, alternating
with as many Father Noahs.</p>

<p>"'This is the office of the Master of the Rolls; we
shall be undisturbed here,' said my friend.</p>

<p>"'Doesn't the Master of the Rolls come here, then?'
I asked.</p>

<p>"'He hasn't been here these five years, and now
he's ashamed to turn up.'</p>

<p>"'But who does his work?'</p>

<p>"'The librarian.'</p>

<p>"'But what is his work in a department like the
Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries?'</p>

<p>"'The messengers sort the receipts, chronologically
and alphabetically, and send them to the book-binders;
the librarian supervises their being placed
on shelves specially adapted for the purpose.'"</p>

<p>The conversation now seemed to amuse Struve;
he scribbled a word every now and then on his cuff,
and as Falk paused he thought it incumbent on him
to ask an important question.</p>

<p>"But how did the Master of the Rolls get his
salary?"</p>

<p>"It was sent to his private address. Wasn't that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10"></a>[10]</span>
simple enough? However, my young friend advised
me to present myself to the actuary and ask him to
introduce me to the other employés who were now
dropping in to poke the fires in their tiled stoves and
enjoy the last glimmer of the glowing wood. My
friend told me that the actuary was an influential
and good-natured individual, very susceptible to little
courtesies.</p>

<p>"I, who had come across him in his character as
Registrar of the Exchequer, had formed a different
opinion of him, but believing that my friend knew
better, I went to see him.</p>

<p>"The redoubtable actuary sat in a capacious easy-chair
with his feet on a reindeer skin. He was
engaged in seasoning a real meerschaum pipe, sewn
up in soft leather. So as not to appear idle, he
was glancing at yesterday's <i>Post</i>, acquainting
himself in this way with the wishes of the Government.</p>

<p>"My entrance seemed to annoy him; he pushed
his spectacles on to his bald head; hiding his right
eye behind the edge of the newspaper, he shot a conical
bullet at me with the left. I proffered my request.
He took the mouthpiece of his meerschaum into his
right hand and examined it to find out how far he had
coloured it. The dreadful silence which followed
confirmed my apprehensions. He cleared his throat;
there was a loud, hissing noise in the heap of glowing
coal. Then he remembered the newspaper and continued
his perusal of it. I judged it wise to repeat
my request in a different form. He lost his temper.
'What the devil do you want? What are you doing
in my room? Can't I have peace in my own
quarters? What? Get out, get out, get out! sir,
I say! Can't you see that I'm busy. Go to the
protonotary if you want anything! Don't come here
bothering me!'</p>

<p>"I went to the protonotary.</p>

<p>"The Committee of Supplies was sitting; it had
been sitting for three weeks already. The protono<span class="pagenum">[11]</span>tary
was in the chair and three clerks were keeping the
minutes. The samples sent in by the purveyors lay
scattered about on the tables, round which all disengaged
clerks, copyists and notaries were assembled.
In spite of much diversity of opinion, it had been
agreed to order twenty reams of Lessebo paper, and
after repeatedly testing their cutting capacity, the
purchase of forty-eight pairs of Grantorp scissors,
which had been awarded a prize, had been decided
on. (The actuary held twenty-five shares in this
concern.) The test writing with the steel nibs had
taken a whole week, and the minutes concerning it
had taken up two reams of paper. It was now the
turn of the penknives, and the committee was intent
on testing them on the leaves of the black table.</p>

<p>"'I propose ordering Sheffield doubleblades No. 4,
without a corkscrew,' said the protonotary, cutting
a splinter off the table large enough to light a fire
with. 'What does the first notary say?'</p>

<p>"The first notary, who had cut too deeply into the
table, had come across a nail and damaged an
Eskilstuna No. 2, with three blades, suggested buying
the latter.</p>

<p>"After everybody had given his opinion and alleged
reasons for holding it, adding practical tests, the
chairman suggested buying two gross of Sheffields.</p>

<p>"But the first notary protested, and delivered a long
speech, which was taken down on record, copied out
twice, registered, sorted (alphabetically and chronologically),
bound and placed by the messenger&mdash;under
the librarian's supervision&mdash;on a specially
adapted shelf. This protest displayed a warm,
patriotic feeling; its principal object was the
demonstration of the necessity of encouraging home
industries.</p>

<p>"But this being equivalent to a charge brought
against the Government&mdash;seeing that it was brought
against one of its employés&mdash;the protonotary felt it
his duty to meet it. He started with a historical
digression on the origin of the discount on manu<span class="pagenum">[12]</span>factured
goods&mdash;at the word discount all the adjuncts
pricked up their ears&mdash;touched on the economic
developments of the country during the last twenty
years, and went into such minute details that the
clock on the Riddarholms church struck two before
he had arrived at his subject. At the fatal stroke
of the clock the whole assembly rushed from their
places as if a fire had broken out. When I asked a
colleague what it all meant, the old notary, who had
heard my question, replied: 'The primary duty of a
Government employé is punctuality, sir!' At two
minutes past two not a soul was left in one of the rooms.</p>

<p>"'We shall have a hot day to-morrow,' whispered
a colleague, as we went downstairs. 'What in the
name of fortune is going to happen?' I asked
uneasily. 'Lead pencils,' he replied. There were
hot days in store for us. Sealing-wax, envelopes,
paper-knives, blotting-paper, string. Still, it might
all be allowed to pass, for every one was occupied.
But a day came when there was nothing to do. I
took my courage in my hands and asked for work.
I was given seven reams of paper for making fair
copies at home, a feat by which 'I should deserve
well of my country.' I did my work in a very short
time, but instead of receiving appreciation and encouragement,
I was treated with suspicion; industrious
people were not in favour. Since then I've
had no work.</p>

<p>"I'll spare you the tedious recital of a year's
humiliations, the countless taunts, the endless bitterness.
Everything which appeared small and ridiculous
to me was treated with grave solemnity, and
everything which I considered great and praiseworthy
was scoffed at. The people were called 'the mob,'
and their only use was to be shot at by the army if
occasion should arise. The new form of government
was openly reviled and the peasants were called
traitors.<a name="FNanchor_A_1" id="FNanchor_A_1"></a><a href="#Footnote_A_1" class="fnanchor">[A]"</a></p>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_A_1" id="Footnote_A_1"></a><a href="#FNanchor_A_1"><span class="label">[A]</span></a> Since the great reorganization of the public offices,
this description is no longer true to life.<span class="pagenum">[13]</span></p></div>

<p>"I had to listen to this sort of thing for seven months;
they began to suspect me because I didn't join in
their laughter, and challenged me. Next time the
'opposition dogs' were attacked, I exploded and
made a speech, the result of which was that they
knew where I stood, and that I was henceforth impossible.
And now I shall do what so many other
shipwrecks have done: I shall throw myself into the
arms of literature."</p>

<p>Struve, who seemed dissatisfied with the truncated
ending, put the pencil back, sipped his toddy and
looked absent-minded. Nevertheless, he thought he
ought to say something.</p>

<p>"My dear fellow," he remarked at last, "you
haven't yet learned the art of living; you will find
out how difficult it is to earn bread and butter, and
how it gradually becomes the main interest. One
works to eat and eats to be able to work. Believe
me, who have wife and child, that I know what I'm
talking about. You must cut your coat according
to your cloth, you see&mdash;according to your cloth.
And you've no idea what the position of a writer is.
He stands outside society."</p>

<p>"His punishment for aspiring to stand above it.
Moreover, I detest society, for it is not founded on a
voluntary basis. It's a web of lies&mdash;I renounce it
with pleasure."</p>

<p>"It's beginning to grow chilly," said Struve.</p>

<p>"Yes; shall we go?"</p>

<p>"Perhaps we'd better."</p>

<p>The flame of conversation had flickered out.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the sun had set; the half moon had
risen and hung over the fields to the north of the
town. Star after star struggled with the daylight
which still lingered in the sky; the gas-lamps were
being lighted in the town; the noise and uproar was
beginning to die away.</p>

<p>Falk and Struve walked together in the direction
of the north, talking of commerce, navigation, the
crafts, everything in fact which did not interest<span class="pagenum">[14]</span>
them; finally, to each other's relief, they
parted.</p>

<p>Falk strolled down River Street towards the dockyard,
his brain pregnant with new thoughts. He
felt like a bird which had flown against a window-pane
and now lay bruised on the ground at the very
moment when it had spread its wings to fly towards
freedom. He sat down on a seat, listening to the
splashing of the waves; a light breeze had sprung
up and rustled through the flowering maple trees,
and the faint light of the half moon shone on the
black water; twenty, thirty boats lay moored on
the quay; they tore at their chains for a moment,
raised their heads, one after the other, and dived
down again, underneath the water; wind and wave
seemed to drive them onward; they made little
runs towards the bridge like a pack of hounds, but
the chain held them in leash and left them kicking
and stamping, as if they were eager to break loose.</p>

<p>He remained in his seat till midnight; the wind
fell asleep, the waves went to rest, the fettered boats
ceased tugging at their chains; the maples stopped
rustling, and the dew was beginning to fall.</p>

<p>Then he rose and strolled home, dreaming, to his
lonely attic in the north-eastern part of the town.</p>

<p>That is what young Falk did; but old Struve,
who on the same day had become a member of the
staff of the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>, because the <i>Red Cap</i>
had sacked him, went home and wrote an article
for the notorious <i>People's Flag</i>, on the Board of
Payment of Employés' Salaries, four columns at five
crowns a column.<span class="pagenum">[15]</span></p>


<p class="break"></p>

<h2><a name="CHAPTER_II" id="CHAPTER_II"></a>CHAPTER II</h2>

<h3>BETWEEN BROTHERS</h3>


<p>The flax merchant, Charles Nicholas Falk&mdash;son of
the late flax merchant, one of the fifty elders of the
burgesses, captain of the infantry of militia, vestryman
and member of the Board of Administration of
the Stockholm Fire Insurance, Charles John Falk,
and brother of the former assessor and present writer,
Arvid Falk&mdash;had a business or, as his enemies preferred
to call it, a shop in Long Street East, nearly
opposite Pig Street, so that the young man who sat
behind the counter, surreptitiously reading a novel,
could see a piece of a steamer, the paddle-box
perhaps, or the jib-boom, and the crown of a tree on
Skeppsholm, with a patch of sky above it, whenever
he raised his eyes from his book.</p>

<p>The shop assistant, who answered to the not
unusual name of Andersson, and he had learnt to
answer to it, had just&mdash;it was early in the morning&mdash;opened
the shop, hung up outside the door a flax
tress, a fish and an eel basket, a bundle of fishing-rods,
and a crawl of unstripped quills; this done,
he had swept the shop, strewn the floor with sawdust,
and sat down behind the counter. He had converted
an empty candle-box into a kind of mouse-trap,
which he set with a hooked stick; immediately on
the appearance of his principal, or any of the latter's
friends, the novel on which Andersson was intent
dropped into the box. He did not seem afraid of
customers; for one thing it was early in the morning
and for another he was not used to very many
customers.<span class="pagenum">[16]</span></p>

<p>The business had been established in the days of
the late King Frederick&mdash;Charles Nicholas Falk had
inherited this statement from his father, to whom it
had descended from his grandfather; it had flourished
and earned a good deal of money until a few years
ago; but the disastrous chamber-system killed trade,
ruined all prospects, impeded all enterprise, and
threatened all citizens with bankruptcy. So, at
least, Falk said; others were inclined to believe
that the business was mismanaged; to say nothing
of the fact that a dangerous competitor had established
himself close to the lock. Falk never talked
of the decline of the business if he could help it,
and he was shrewd enough carefully to choose
occasion and audience whenever he touched upon
<i>that</i> string. If an old business connexion expressed
surprise, in a friendly way, at the reduced trade, he
told him that his principal business was a wholesale
trade in the provinces, and that he was looking upon
the shop merely in the light of a sign-board; nobody
doubted this, for he had, behind the shop, a small
counting-house where he generally could be found
when he was not in town or at the Exchange. But
it was quite another tale if any of his acquaintances,
such as the notary or the schoolmaster, for instance,
expressed the same friendly uneasiness. Then he blamed
the bad times, the result of the new chamber-system;
this alone was to blame for the stagnation of trade.</p>

<p>Andersson was disturbed in his reading by two or
three boys who were standing in the doorway, asking
the price of the fishing-rods. Looking out into the
street he caught sight of our Mr. Arvid Falk. Falk
had lent him the book, so that it could safely be
left on the counter; and as his former playfellow
entered the shop, he greeted him familiarly, with a
knowing look.</p>

<p>"Is he upstairs?" asked Falk, not without a
certain uneasiness.</p>

<p>"He's at breakfast," replied Andersson, pointing
to the ceiling.<span class="pagenum">[17]</span></p>

<p>A chair was pushed back on the floor above their
heads.</p>

<p>"He's got up from the table now, Mr. Arvid."</p>

<p>Both young men seemed familiar with the noise
and its purport. Heavy, creaking footsteps crossed
the floor, apparently in all directions, and a subdued
murmur penetrated through the ceiling to the
listeners below.</p>

<p>"Was he at home last night?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"No, he was out."</p>

<p>"With friends or acquaintances?"</p>

<p>"Acquaintances."</p>

<p>"Did he come home late?"</p>

<p>"Very late."</p>

<p>"Do you think he'll be coming down soon,
Andersson? I don't want to go upstairs on account
of my sister-in-law."</p>

<p>"He'll be here directly; I can tell by his footsteps."</p>

<p>A door slammed upstairs; they looked at each
other significantly. Arvid made a movement towards
the door, but pulled himself together.</p>

<p>A few moments later they heard sounds in the
counting-house. A violent cough shook the little
room and then came the well-known footsteps,
saying: stamp&mdash;stamp, stamp&mdash;stamp!</p>

<p>Arvid went behind the counter and knocked at
the door of the counting-house.</p>

<p>"Come in!"</p>

<p>He stood before his brother, a man of forty who
looked his age. He was fifteen years older than
Arvid, and for that and other reasons he had accustomed
himself to look upon his younger brother as
a boy towards whom he acted as a father. He had
fair hair, a fair moustache, fair eyebrows, and
eye-lashes. He was rather stout, and that
was the reason why his boots always creaked;
they groaned under the weight of his thick-set
figure.</p>

<p>"Oh, it's only you?" he said with good-natured<span class="pagenum">[18]</span>
contempt. This attitude of mind was typical of the
man; he was never angry with those who for some
reason or other could be considered his inferiors; he
despised them. But his face expressed disappointment;
he had expected a more satisfactory subject
for an outburst; his brother was shy and modest,
and never offered resistance if he could possibly
help it.</p>

<p>"I hope I'm not inconveniencing you, brother
Charles?" asked Arvid, standing on the threshold.
This humble question disposed the brother to show
benevolence. He helped himself to a cigar from
his big, embroidered leather cigar-case, offering his
brother a smoke from a box which stood near the
fire-place; that boxful&mdash;visitors' cigars, as he frankly
called them, and he was of a candid disposition&mdash;had
been through a shipwreck, which made them
interesting, but did not improve them, and a sale by
auction on the strand, which had made them very
cheap.</p>

<p>"Well, what is it you want?" asked Charles
Nicholas, lighting his cigar, and absent-mindedly
putting the match into his pocket&mdash;he could only
concentrate his thoughts on one spot inside a not
very large circumference; his tailor could have
expressed the size of it in inches after measuring him
round the stomach.</p>

<p>"I want to talk business with you," answered
Arvid, fingering his unlighted cigar.</p>

<p>"Sit down!" commanded the brother.</p>

<p>It was customary with him to ask people to sit
down whenever he intended to take them to task;
he had them under him, then, and it was more easy
to crush them&mdash;if necessary.</p>

<p>"Business? Are we doing business together?"
he began. "I don't know anything about it. Are
you doing business? Are you?"</p>

<p>"I only meant to say that I should like to know
whether there's anything more coming to me?"</p>

<p>"What, may I ask? Do you mean money?" <span class="pagenum">[19]</span>
said Charles Nicholas, jestingly, allowing his brother
to enjoy the scent of his good cigar. As the reply,
which he did not want, was not forthcoming, he
went on:</p>

<p>"Coming to you? Haven't you received everything
due to you? Haven't you yourself receipted
the account for the Court of Wards? Haven't I kept
and clothed you since&mdash;to be strictly correct, haven't
I made you a loan, according to your own wish, to be
paid back when you are able to do so? I've put it
all down, in readiness for the day when you will be
earning your livelihood, a thing which you've not
done yet."</p>

<p>"I'm going to do it now, and that's why I'm here.
I wanted to know whether there's still anything
owing to me, or whether I am in debt."</p>

<p>The brother cast a penetrating look at his victim,
wondering whether he had any mental reservations.
His creaking boots began stamping the floor on a
diagonal line between spittoon and umbrella-stand;
the trinkets on his watch-chain tinkled, a warning to
people not to cross his way; the smoke of his cigar
rose and lay in long, ominous clouds, portentous of
a thunderstorm, between tiled stove and door. He
paced up and down the room furiously, his head
bowed, his shoulders rounded, as if he were rehearsing
a part. When he thought he knew it, he stopped
short before his brother, gazed into his eyes with a
long, glinting, deceitful look, intended to express
both confidence and sorrow, and said, in a voice
meant to sound as if it came from the family grave
in the churchyard of St. Clara's:</p>

<p>"You're not straight, Arvid; you're not straight."</p>

<p>Who, with the exception of Andersson, who was
standing behind the door, listening, would not have
been touched by those words, spoken by a brother to a
brother, fraught with the deepest brotherly sorrow?
Even Arvid, accustomed from his childhood to
believe all men perfect and himself alone unworthy,
wondered for a moment whether he was straight or<span class="pagenum">[20]</span>
not? And as his education, by efficacious means,
had provided him with a highly sensitive conscience,
he found that he really had not been quite straight,
or at least quite frank, when he asked his brother
the not-altogether candid question as to whether he
wasn't a scoundrel.</p>

<p>"I've come to the conclusion," he said, "that
you cheated me out of a part of my inheritance;
I've calculated that you charged too much for your
inferior board and your cast-off clothes; I know
that I didn't spend all my fortune during my terrible
college days, and I believe that you owe me a fairly
big sum; I want it now, and I request you to hand
it over to me."</p>

<p>A smile illuminated the brother's fair face, and
with an expression so calm and a gesture so steady,
that he might have been rehearsing them for years,
so as to be in readiness when his cue was given to
him, he put his hand in his trousers pocket, rattled
his bunch of keys before taking it out, threw it up
and dexterously caught it again, and walked solemnly
to his safe. He opened it more quickly than he
intended and, perhaps, than the sacredness of the
spot justified, took out a paper lying ready to his
hand and evidently also waiting for its cue, and
handed it to his brother.</p>

<p>"Did you write this? Answer me! Did you
write it?"</p>

<p>"Yes!"</p>

<p>Arvid rose and turned towards the door.</p>

<p>"Don't go! Sit down! Sit down!"</p>

<p>If a dog had been present it would have sat down
at once.</p>

<p>"What's written here? Read it! 'I, Arvid
Falk, acknowledge and testify&mdash;that&mdash;I&mdash;have received
from my brother, Charles Nicholas Falk&mdash;who
was appointed my guardian&mdash;my inheritance
in full&mdash;amounting to&mdash;' and so on." He was
ashamed to mention the sum.</p>

<p>"You have acknowledged and testified a fact<span class="pagenum">[21]</span>
which you did not believe. Is that straight? No,
answer my question! Is that straight? No!
Therefore you have borne false witness. Ergo&mdash;you're
a blackguard! Yes, that's what you are!
Am I right?"</p>

<p>The part was too excellent and the triumph too
great to be enjoyed without an audience. The
innocently accused must have witnesses. He opened
the door leading into the shop.</p>

<p>"Andersson!" he shouted, "answer this question!
Listen to me! If I bear false witness, am I a blackguard
or not?"</p>

<p>"Of course, you are a blackguard, sir!" Andersson
answered unhesitatingly and with warmth.</p>

<p>"Do you hear? He says I'm a blackguard&mdash;if
I put my signature to a false receipt. What did I
say? You're not straight, Arvid, you are not
straight. Good-natured people often are blackguards;
you have always been good-natured and
yielding, but I've always been aware that in your
secret heart you harboured very different thoughts;
you're a blackguard! Your father always said so;
I say 'said,' for he always said what he thought, and
he was a straight man, Arvid, and that&mdash;you&mdash;are&mdash;not!
And you may be sure that if he were still
alive he would say with grief and pain: 'You're not
straight, Arvid, you&mdash;are&mdash;not&mdash;straight!'"</p>

<p>He did a few more diagonal lines and it sounded
as if he were applauding the scene with his feet; he
rattled his bunch of keys as if he were giving the
signal for the curtain to rise. His closing remarks
had been so rounded off that the smallest addition
would have spoilt the whole. In spite of the heavy
charge which he had actually expected for years&mdash;for
he had always believed his brother to be acting
a part&mdash;he was very glad that it was over, happily
over, well and cleverly over, so that he felt almost
gay and even a little grateful. Moreover he had had
a splendid chance of venting the wrath which had been
kindled upstairs, in his family, on some one; to vent<span class="pagenum">[22]</span>
it on Andersson had lost its charm; and he knew
better than to vent it on his wife.</p>

<p>Arvid was silent; the education he had received
had so intimidated him that he always believed
himself to be in the wrong; since his childhood the
great words "upright, honest, sincere, true," had
daily and hourly been drummed into his ears, so
that they stood before him like a judge, continuously
saying: "Guilty...." For a moment he thought
that he must have been mistaken in his calculations,
that his brother must be innocent and he himself a
scoundrel; but immediately after he realized that
his brother was a cheat, deceiving him by a simple
lawyer's trick. He felt prompted to run away, fearful
of being drawn into a quarrel, to run away without
making his request number two, and confessing that
he was on the point of changing his profession.</p>

<p>There was a long pause. Charles Nicholas had
plenty of time to recapitulate his triumph in his
memory. That little word "blackguard" had done
his tongue good. It had been as pleasant as if he
had said "Get out!" And the opening of the door,
Andersson's reply, and the production of the paper,
everything had passed off splendidly; he had not
forgotten the bunch of keys on his night-table; he
had turned the key in the lock without any difficulty;
his proof was binding as a rope, the conclusion he
had drawn had been the baited hook by which the
fish had been caught.</p>

<p>He had regained his good temper; he had forgiven,
nay, he had forgotten, and as he slammed the door
of the safe, he shut away the disagreeable story for
ever.</p>

<p>But he did not want to part from his brother in
this mood; he wanted to talk to him on other
subjects; throw a few shovelfuls of gossip on the
unpleasant affair, see him under commonplace circumstances,
sitting at his table, for instance&mdash;and
why not eating and drinking? People always looked
happy and content when they were eating and<span class="pagenum">[23]</span>
drinking; he wanted so see him happy and content.
He wanted to see his face calm, listen to his voice
speaking without a tremor, and he resolved to ask
him to luncheon. But he felt puzzled how to lead
up to it, find a suitable bridge across the gulf. He
searched his brain, but found nothing. He searched
his pockets and found&mdash;the match.</p>

<p>"Hang it all, you've never lit your cigar, old
boy!" he exclaimed with genuine, not feigned,
warmth.</p>

<p>But the old boy had crushed his cigar during the
conversation, so that it would not draw.</p>

<p>"Look here! Take another!" and he pulled out
his big leather case.</p>

<p>"Here! Take one of these! They are good
ones!"</p>

<p>Arvid, who, unfortunately, could not bear to hurt
anybody's feelings, accepted it gratefully, like a
hand offered in reconciliation.</p>

<p>"Now, old boy," continued Charles Nicholas,
talking lightly and pleasantly, an accomplishment at
which he was an expert. "Let's go to the nearest
restaurant and have lunch. Come along!"</p>

<p>Arvid, unused to friendliness, was so touched by
these advances that he hastily pressed his brother's
hand and hurried away through the shop without
taking any notice of Andersson, and out into the
street.</p>

<p>The brother felt embarrassed; he could not understand
it. To run away when he had been asked to
lunch! To run away when he was not in the least
angry with him! To run away! No dog would have
run away if a piece of meat had been thrown to him!</p>

<p>"He's a queer chap!" he muttered, stamping the
floor. Then he went to his desk, screwed up the seat
of his chair as high as it would go and climbed up.
From this raised position he was in the habit of
contemplating men and circumstances as from a
higher point of view, and he found them small; yet not
so small that he could not use them for his purposes.<span class="pagenum">[24]</span></p>


<p class="break"></p>

<h2><a name="CHAPTER_III" id="CHAPTER_III"></a>CHAPTER III</h2>

<h3>THE ARTISTS' COLONY</h3>


<p>It was between eight and nine o'clock on the same
beautiful May morning. Arvid Falk, after the scene
with his brother, was strolling through the streets,
dissatisfied with himself, his brother, and the whole
world. He would have preferred to see the sky
overcast, to be in bad company. He did not believe
that he was a blackguard, but he was disappointed
with the part he had played; he was accustomed to
be severe on himself, and it had always been drummed
into him that his brother was a kind of stepfather
to whom he owed great respect, not to say reverence.
But he was worried and depressed by other thoughts
as well. He had neither money nor prospect of work.
The last contingency was, perhaps, the worse of the
two, for to him, with his exuberant imagination,
idleness was a dangerous enemy.</p>

<p>Brooding over these disagreeable facts, he had
reached Little Garden Street; he sauntered along,
on the left pavement, passed the Dramatic Theatre,
and soon reached High Street North. He walked
on aimlessly; the pavement became uneven; wooden
cottages took the place of the stone houses; badly
dressed men and women were throwing suspicious
glances at the well-dressed stranger who was visiting
their quarter at such an early hour; famished dogs
growled threateningly at him. He hastened past
groups of gunners, labourers, brewers' men, laundresses,
and apprentices, and finally came to Great
Hop-Garden Street. He entered the Hop-Garden.
The cows belonging to the Inspector-General of<span class="pagenum">[25]</span>
Ordnance were grazing in the fields; the old, bare
apple trees were making the first efforts to put forth
buds; but the lime trees were already in leaf and
squirrels were playing up and down the branches.
He passed the merry-go-round and came to the
avenue leading to the theatre; here he met some
truant schoolboys engaged in a game of buttons;
a little further a painter's apprentice was lying in
the grass on his back staring at the clouds through
the dome of foliage; he was whistling carelessly,
indifferent to the fact that master and men were
waiting for him, while flies and other insects drowned
themselves in his paint-pots.</p>

<p>Falk had walked to the top of the hill and had come
to the duck-pond; he stood still for a while, studying
the metamorphoses of the frogs; watching the
leeches; catching a water-spider. Then he began
to throw stones. The exercise brought his blood into
circulation; he felt rejuvenated, a schoolboy playing
truant, free, defiantly free! It was freedom bought
by great self-sacrifice. The thought of being able
to commune with nature freely and at will, made him
glad; he understood nature better than men who had
only ill-treated and slandered him; his unrest
disappeared; he rose and continued his way further
into the country.</p>

<p>Walking through the Cross, he came into Hop-Garden
Street North. Some of the boards were
missing in the fence facing him, and there was a
very plainly marked footpath on the other side. He
crept through the hole, disturbing an old woman who
was gathering nettles, crossed the large tobacco field
where a colony of villas has now sprung up, and found
himself at the gate of "Lill-Jans."</p>

<p>There was no doubt of its being spring in the little
settlement, consisting of three cottages snugly nestling
among elders and apple trees, and sheltered from the
north wind by the pine-wood on the other side of the
High Road. The visitor was regaled with a perfect
little idyll. A cock, perched on the shafts of a water<span class="pagenum">[26]</span>cart,
was basking in the sun and catching flies, the bees
hung in a cloud round the bee-hives, the gardener
was kneeling by the hot-beds, sorting radishes; the
warblers and brand-tails were singing in the gooseberry
bushes, while lightly clad children chased the
fowls bent on examining the germinative capacity
of various newly sown seeds. A brilliant blue sky
spanned the scene and the dark forest framed the
background.</p>

<p>Two men were sitting close to the hot-beds, in the
shelter of the fence. One of them, wearing a tall,
black hat and a threadbare, black suit, had a long,
narrow, pale face, and looked like a clergyman.
With his stout but deformed body, drooping eyelids,
and Mongolian moustache, the other one belonged to
the type of civilized peasant. He was very badly
dressed and might have been many things: a vagabond,
an artisan, or an artist; he looked seedy, but
seedy in an original way.</p>

<p>The lean man, who obviously felt chilly, although
he sat right in the sun, was reading to his friend from
a book; the latter looked as though he had tried all
the climates of the earth and was able to stand them
all equally well.</p>

<p>As Falk entered the garden gate from the high road,
he could distinctly hear the reader's words through
the fence, and he thought it no breach of confidence
to stand still for a while and listen.</p>

<p>The lean man was reading in a dry, monotonous
voice, a voice without resonance, and his stout friend
every now and then acknowledged his appreciation
by a snort which changed occasionally into a grunt
and became a splutter whenever the words of wisdom
to which he was listening surpassed ordinary human
understanding.</p>

<p>"'The highest principles are, as already stated,
three; one, absolutely unconditioned, and two,
relatively unconditioned ones. <i>Pro primo</i>: the
absolutely first, purely unconditioned principle,
would express the action underlying all consciousness<span class="pagenum">[27]</span>
and without which consciousness cannot exist. This
principle is the identity A&mdash;A. It endures and
cannot be disposed of by thought when all empirical
definitions of consciousness are prescinded. It is
the original fact of consciousness and must therefore,
of necessity, be acknowledged. Moreover, it is not
conditioned like every other empirical fact, but as
consequence and substance of a voluntary act entirely
unconditioned.'"</p>

<p>"Do you follow, Olle?" asked the reader,
interrupting himself.</p>

<p>"It's amazing! It is not conditioned like every
other empirical fact. Oh! What a man! Go on!
Go on!"</p>

<p>"'If it is maintained,'" continued the reader,
"'that this proposition without any further proof be
true....'"</p>

<p>"Oh! I say! What a rascal! without any further
proof be true," repeated the grateful listener, bent
on dissipating all suspicion that he had not grasped
what had been read, "without any <i>further</i> reason,
how subtle, how subtle of him to say that instead
of simply saying 'without any reason.'"</p>

<p>"Am I to continue? Or do you intend to go on
interrupting me?" asked the offended reader.</p>

<p>"I won't interrupt again. Go on! Go on!"</p>

<p>"Well, now he draws the conclusion (really excellent):
'If one ascribes to oneself the ability to state
a proposition&mdash;&mdash;'"</p>

<p>Olle snorted.</p>

<p>"'One does not propose thereby A (capital A),
but merely that A&mdash;A, if and in so far as A exists
at all. It is not a question of the essence of an assertion
but only of its form. The proposition A&mdash;A is
therefore conditioned (hypothetically) as far as its
essence is concerned, and unconditioned only as far as
its form goes.'</p>

<p>"Have you noticed the capital A?"</p>

<p>Falk had heard enough; this was the terribly
profound philosophy of Upsala, which had strayed to<span class="pagenum">[28]</span>
Stockholm to conquer and subdue the coarse instincts
of the capital. He looked at the fowls to see
whether they had not tumbled off their roosts; at
the parsley whether it had not stopped growing
while made to listen to the profoundest wisdom ever
proclaimed by human voice at Lill-Jans; he was
surprised to find that the sky had not fallen after
witnessing such a feat of mental strength. At
the same time his base human nature clamoured
for attention: his throat was parched, and he
decided to ask for a glass of water at one of the
cottages.</p>

<p>Turning back he strolled towards the hut on the
right-hand side of the road, coming from town. The
door leading into a large room&mdash;once a bakery&mdash;from
an entrance-hall the size of a travelling trunk,
stood open. The room contained a bed-sofa, a broken
chair, an easel, and two men. One of them, wearing
only a shirt and a pair of trousers kept up by a leather
belt, was standing before the easel. He looked like
a journeyman, but he was an artist making a sketch for
an altar-piece. The other man was a youth with
clear-cut features and, considering his environment,
well-made clothes. He had taken off his coat,
turned back his shirt and was serving as the artist's
model. His handsome, noble face showed traces of
a night of dissipation, and every now and then he
dozed, each time reprimanded by the master who
seemed to have taken him under his protection. As
Falk was entering the room he heard the burden of
one of these reprimands:</p>

<p>"That you should make such a hog of yourself
and spend the night drinking with that loafer Sellén,
and now be standing here wasting your time instead
of being at the Commercial School! The right
shoulder a little higher, please; that's better! Is it
true that you've spent all the money for your rent
and daren't go home? Have you nothing left?
Not one farthing?"</p>

<p>"I still have some, but it won't go far." The<span class="pagenum">[29]</span>
young man pulled a scrap of paper out of his trousers
pocket, and straightening it out, produced two
notes for a crown each.</p>

<p>"Give them to me, I'll take care of them for
you," exclaimed the master, seizing them with
fatherly solicitude.</p>

<p>Falk, who had vainly tried to attract their attention,
thought it best to depart as quietly as he had come.
Once more passing the manure heap and the two
philosophers, he turned to the left. He had not gone
far when he caught sight of a young man who had put
up his easel at the edge of a little bog planted with
alder trees, close to the wood. He had a graceful,
slight, almost elegant figure, and a thin, dark face.
He seemed to scintillate life as he stood before his
easel, working at a fine picture. He had taken off
his coat and hat and appeared to be in excellent
health and spirits; alternately talking to himself and
whistling or humming snatches of song.</p>

<p>When Falk was near enough to have him in profile
he turned round.</p>

<p>"Sellén! Good morning, old chap!"</p>

<p>"Falk! Fancy meeting you out here in the wood!
What the deuce does it, mean? Oughtn't you to be
at your office at this time of day?"</p>

<p>"No! But are you living out here?"</p>

<p>"Yes; I came here on the first of April with some
pals. Found life in town too expensive&mdash;and,
moreover, landlords are so particular."</p>

<p>A sly smile played about one of the corners of his
mouth and his brown eyes flashed.</p>

<p>"I see," Falk began again; "then perhaps you
know the two individuals who were sitting by the
hot-beds just now, reading?"</p>

<p>"The philosophers? Of course, I do! The tall
one is an assistant at the Public Sales Office at a
salary of eighty crowns per annum, and the short
one, Olle Montanus, ought to be at home at his
sculpture&mdash;but since he and Ygberg have taken up
philosophy, he has left off working and is fast going<span class="pagenum">[30]</span>
down hill. He has discovered that there is something
sensual in art."</p>

<p>"What's he living on?"</p>

<p>"On nothing at all! Occasionally he sits to the
practical Lundell and then he gets a piece of black
pudding. This lasts him for about a day. In the
winter Lundell lets him lie on his floor; 'he helps
to warm the room,' he says, and wood is very dear;
it was very cold here in April."</p>

<p>"How can he be a model? He looks such a God-help-me
sort of chap."</p>

<p>"He poses for one of the thieves in Lundell's
"Descent from the Cross," the one whose bones are
already broken; the poor devil's suffering from hip
disease; he does splendidly when he leans across the
back of a chair; sometimes the artist makes him turn
his back to him; then he represents the other
thief."</p>

<p>"But why doesn't he work himself? Has he no
talent?"</p>

<p>"Olle Montanus, my dear fellow, is a genius, but
he won't work. He's a philosopher and would have
become a great man if he could have gone to college.
It's really extraordinary to listen to him and Ygberg
talking philosophy; it's true, Ygberg has read more,
but in spite of that Montanus, with his subtle brain,
succeeds in cornering him every now and again;
then Ygberg goes away and reads some more, but he
never lends the book to Montanus."</p>

<p>"I see! And you like Ygberg's philosophy?"
asked Falk.</p>

<p>"Oh! It's subtle, wonderfully subtle! You like
Fichte, don't you? I say! What a man!"</p>

<p>"Who were the two individuals in the cottage?"
asked Falk, who did not like Fichte.</p>

<p>"Oh. You saw them too? One of them was the
practical Lundell, a painter of figures, or rather,
sacred subjects; the other one was my friend
Rehnhjelm."</p>

<p>He pronounced the last few words with the utmost<span class="pagenum">[31]</span>
indifference, so as to heighten their effect as much as
possible.</p>

<p>"Rehnhjelm?"</p>

<p>"Yes; a very nice fellow."</p>

<p>"He was acting as Lundell's model."</p>

<p>"Was he? That's like Lundell! He knows how
to make use of people; he is extraordinarily practical.
But come along, let's worry him; it's the only fun I
have out here. Then, perhaps, you'll hear Montanus
speaking, and that's really worth while."</p>

<p>Less for the sake of hearing Montanus speaking
than for the sake of obtaining a glass of water, Falk
followed Sellén, helping him to carry easel and paintbox.</p>

<p>The scene in the cottage was slightly changed;
the model was now sitting on the broken chair, and
Montanus and Ygberg on the bed-sofa. Lundell was
standing at his easel, smoking; his seedy friends
watched him and his old, snoring cherry-wood pipe; the
very presence of a pipe and tobacco raised their spirits.</p>

<p>Falk was introduced and immediately Lundell
monopolized him, asking him for his opinion of the
picture he was painting. It was a Rubens, at least as
far as the subject went, though anything but a Rubens
in colour and drawing. Thereupon Lundell dilated
on the hard times and difficulties of an artist, severely
criticized the Academy, and censured the Government
for neglecting native art. He was engaged in
sketching an altar-piece, although he was convinced
that it would be refused, for nobody could succeed
without intrigues and connexions. And he scrutinized
Falk's clothes, wondering whether <i>he</i> might be a
useful connexion.</p>

<p>Falk's appearance had produced a different effect
on the two philosophers. They scented a man of
letters in him, and hated him because he might rob
them of the reputation they enjoyed in the small
circle. They exchanged significant glances, immediately
understood by Sellén, who found it impossible
to resist the temptation of showing off his friends<span class="pagenum">[32]</span>
in their glory, and, if possible, bring about an encounter.
He soon found an apple of discord, aimed,
threw, and hit.</p>

<p>"What do you say to Lundell's picture, Ygberg?"</p>

<p>Ygberg, not expecting to be called upon to speak
so soon, had to consider his answer for a few seconds.
Then he made his reply, raising his voice, while
Olle rubbed his back to make him hold himself
straight.</p>

<p>"A work of art may, in my opinion, be divided into
two categories: subject and form. With regard
to the subject in this work of art there is no denying
that it is profound and universally human; the
motive, properly speaking, is in itself fertile, and
contains all the potentialities of artistic work. With
regard to the form which of itself shall <i>de facto</i> manifest
the idea, that is to say the absolute identity, the
being, the ego&mdash;I cannot help saying that I find it less
adequate."</p>

<p>Lundell was obviously flattered. Olle smiled his
sunniest smile as if he were contemplating the
heavenly hosts; the model was asleep and Sellén
found that Ygberg had scored a complete success.
All eyes were turned on Falk who was compelled to
take up the gauntlet, for no one doubted that Ygberg's
criticism was a challenge.</p>

<p>Falk was both amused and annoyed. He was
searching the limbo of memory for philosophical
air-guns, when he caught sight of Olle Montanus,
whose convulsed face betrayed his desire to speak.
Falk loaded his gun at random with Aristotle and
fired.</p>

<p>"What do you mean by adequate? I cannot
recollect that Aristotle made use of that word in his
Metaphysics."</p>

<p>Absolute silence fell on the room; everybody felt
that a fight between the artist's colony and the
University of Upsala was imminent. The interval
was longer than was desirable, for Ygberg was
unacquainted with Aristotle and would have died<span class="pagenum">[33]</span>
sooner than have admitted it. As he was not quick
at repartee, he failed to discover the breach which
Falk had left open; but Olle did, caught Aristotle
with both hands and flung him back at his opponent.</p>

<p>"Although I'm not a learned man, I venture to
question whether you, Mr. Falk, have upset your
opponent's argument? In my opinion <i>adequate</i>
may be used and accepted as a definition in a logical
conclusion, in spite of Aristotle not having mentioned
the word in his Metaphysics. Am I right, gentlemen?
I don't know, I'm not a learned man and
Mr. Falk has made a study of these things."</p>

<p>He had spoken with half-closed eyelids; now he
closed them entirely and looked impudently shy.</p>

<p>There was a general murmur of "Olle is right."</p>

<p>Falk realized that this was a matter to be handled
without mittens, if the honour of Upsala was to be
safeguarded; he made a pass with the philosophical
pack of cards and threw up an ace.</p>

<p>"Mr. Montanus has denied the antecedent or said
simply: <i>nego majorem!</i> Very well! I, on my part,
declare that he has been guilty of a <i>posterius prius</i>;
when he found himself on the horns of a dilemma he
went astray and made a syllogism after <i>ferioque</i>
instead of <i>barbara</i>. He has forgotten the golden rule:
<i>Cæsare camestres festino baroco secundo</i>; and therefore
his conclusion became weakened. Am I right
gentlemen?"</p>

<p>"Quite right, absolutely right," replied everybody,
except the two philosophers who had never held a
book of logic in their hands.</p>

<p>Ygberg looked as if he had bitten on a nail, and
Olle grinned as if a handful of snuff had been thrown
into his eyes; but his native shrewdness had discovered
the tactical method of his opponent. He
resolved not to stick to the point, but to talk of
something else. He brought out everything he had
learned and everything he had heard, beginning with
the Criticism of Fichte's Philosophy to which Falk
had been listening a little while ago from behind<span class="pagenum">[34]</span>
the fence. The discussion went on until the morning
was nearly spent.</p>

<p>In the meantime Lundell went on painting, his foul
pipe snoring loudly. The model had fallen asleep
on the broken chair, his head sinking deeper and
deeper until, about noon, it hung between his knees;
a mathematician could have calculated the time when
it would reach the centre of the earth.</p>

<p>Sellén was sitting at the open window enjoying
himself; but poor Falk, who had been under the
impression that this terrible philosophy was a thing
of the past, was compelled to continue throwing
fistfuls of philosophic snuff into the eyes of his
antagonists. The torture would never have come
to an end if the model's centre of gravity had not
gradually shifted to one of the most delicate parts
of the chair; it gave way and the Baron fell on the
floor. Lundell seized the opportunity to inveigh
against the vice of drunkenness and its miserable
consequences for the victim as well as for others;
by others he meant, of course, himself.</p>

<p>Falk, anxious to come to the assistance of the
embarrassed youth, eagerly asked a question bound
to be of general interest.</p>

<p>"Where are the gentlemen going to dine?"</p>

<p>The room grew silent, so silent that the buzzing of
the flies was plainly audible; Falk was quite unconscious
of the fact that he had stepped on five corns
at one and the same moment. It was Lundell who
broke the silence. He and Rehnhjelm were going to
dine at the "Sauce-Pan," their usual restaurant,
for they had credit there; Sellén objected to the place
because he did not like the cooking, and had not yet
decided on another establishment; he looked at
the model with an anxious, inquiring glance. Ygberg
and Montanus were too "busy" and "not going to
cut up their working-day" by "dressing and going
up to town." They were going to get something
out here, but they did not say what.</p>

<p>A general dressing began, principally consisting of<span class="pagenum">[35]</span>
a wash at the old garden-pump. Sellén, who was a
dandy, had hidden a parcel wrapped in a newspaper
underneath the bed-sofa, from which he produced
collar, cuffs and shirt-front, made of paper. He
knelt for a long time before the pump, gazing into
the trough, while he put on a brownish-green tie, a
present from a lady, and arranged his hair in a particular
style.</p>

<p>When he had rubbed his shoes with a bur leaf,
brushed his hat with his coat sleeve, put a grape-hyacinth
in his buttonhole and seized his cinnamon
cane, he was ready to go. To his question whether
Rehnhjelm would be ready soon, Lundell replied
that he would be hours yet, as he required his assistance
in drawing; Lundell always devoted the time
from twelve to two to drawing. Rehnhjelm submitted
and obeyed, although he found it hard to part with
Sellén, of whom he was fond, and stay with Lundell
whom he disliked.</p>

<p>"We shall meet to-night at the Red Room," said
Sellén, comforting him, and all agreed, even the
philosophers and the moral Lundell.</p>

<p>On their way to town Sellén initiated his friend Falk
into some of the secrets of the colonists. As for
himself, he had broken with the Academy, because
his views on art differed from theirs; he knew that
he had talent and would eventually be successful,
although success might be long in coming. It was,
of course, frightfully difficult to make a name without
the Royal Medal. There were also natural obstacles
in his way. He was a native of the barren coast of
Halland and loved grandeur and simplicity; but
critics and public demanded detail and trifles;
therefore his pictures did not sell; he could have
painted what everybody else painted, but he scorned
to do so.</p>

<p>Lundell, on the other hand, was a practical man&mdash;Sellén
always pronounced the word <i>practical</i> with a
certain contempt&mdash;he painted to please the public.
He never suffered from indisposition; it was true<span class="pagenum">[36]</span>
he had left the Academy, but for secret, practical
reasons; moreover, in spite of his assertion, he had
not broken with it entirely. He made a good income
out of his illustrations for magazines and, although
he had little talent, he was bound to make his fortune
some day, not only because of the number of his connexions,
but also because of his intrigues. It was
Montanus who had put him up to those; he was
the originator of more than one plan which Lundell had
successfully carried out. Montanus was a genius,
although he was terribly unpractical.</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm was a native of Norrland. His father
had been a wealthy man; he had owned a large
estate which was now the property of his former
inspector. The old aristocrat was comparatively
poor; he hoped that his son would learn a lesson
from the past, take an inspector's post and eventually
restore the family to its former position by the
acquisition of a new estate. Buoyed up with this
hope, he had sent him to the Commercial School to
study agricultural book-keeping, an accomplishment
which the youth detested. He was a good fellow
but a little weak, and allowing himself to be influenced
by Lundell, who did not scorn to take the
fee for his preaching and patronage in natura.</p>

<p>In the meantime Lundell and the Baron had started
work; the Baron was drawing, while the master
lay on the sofa, supervising the work, in other words,
smoking.</p>

<p>"If you'll put your back into your work, you
shall come to dinner with me at the 'Brass-Button,'"
promised Lundell, feeling rich with the two crowns
which he had saved from destruction.</p>

<p>Ygberg and Montanus had sauntered up the
wooded eminence, intending to sleep away the dinner
hour; Olle beamed after his victories, but Ygberg was
depressed; his pupil had surpassed him. Moreover,
his feet were cold and he was unusually hungry, for
the eager discussion of dinner had awakened in him
slumbering feelings successfully suppressed for the<span class="pagenum">[37]</span>
last twelve months. They threw themselves under
a pine tree; Ygberg hid the precious, carefully
wrapped up book, which he always refused to lend
to Olle, under his head, and stretched himself full-length
on the ground; he looked deadly pale, cold
and calm like a corpse which has abandoned all hope
of resurrection. He watched some little birds above
his head picking at the pine seed and letting the
husks fall down on him; he watched a cow, the
picture of robust health, grazing among the alders;
he saw the smoke rising from the gardener's kitchen
chimney.</p>

<p>"Are you hungry, Olle?" he asked in a feeble
voice.</p>

<p>"No!" replied Olle, casting covetous looks at the
wonderful book.</p>

<p>"Oh! to be a cow!" sighed Ygberg, crossing his
hands on his chest and giving himself up to all-merciful
sleep.</p>

<p>When his low breathing had become regular, the
waking friend gently pulled the book from its hiding-place,
without disturbing the sleeper; then he
turned over and lying on his stomach he began to
devour the precious contents, forgetting all about
the "Sauce-Pan" and the "Brass-Button." <span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_38" id="Page_38">[38]</a></span></p>


<p class="break"></p>

 <h2><a name="CHAPTER_IV" id="CHAPTER_IV"></a>CHAPTER IV</h2>

<h3>MASTER AND DOGS</h3>


<p>Two or three days had passed. Mrs. Charles
Nicholas Falk, a lady of twenty-two years of age,
had just finished her breakfast in bed, the colossal
mahogany bed in the large bedroom. It was only
ten o'clock. Her husband had been away since
seven, taking up flax on the shore. But the young
wife had not stayed in bed&mdash;a thing she knew to
be contrary to the rules of the house&mdash;because she
counted on his absence. She had only been married
for two years, but during that period she had found
abundant time to introduce sweeping reforms in
the old, conservative, middle-class household, where
everything was old, even the servants. He had
invested her with the necessary power on the day
on which he had confessed his love to her, and she
had graciously consented to become his wife, that
is to say, permitted him to deliver her from the
hated bondage of her parental roof, where she had
been compelled to get up every morning at six
o'clock and work all day long. She had made good
use of the period of her engagement, for it was then
that she had collected a number of guarantees,
promising her a free and independent life, unmolested
by any interference on the part of her husband.
Of course these guarantees consisted merely of verbal
assurances made by a love-sick man, but she, who
had never allowed her emotion to get the better
of her, had carefully noted them down on the tablets
of her memory. After two years of matrimony,
unredeemed by the promise of a child, the husband
showed a decided inclination to set aside all these<span class="pagenum">[39]</span>
guarantees, and question her right to sleep as long
as she liked, for instance, to have breakfast in bed,
etcetera, etcetera; he had even been so indelicate as to
remind her that he had pulled her out of the mire;
had delivered her from a hell, thereby sacrificing himself.
The marriage had been a misalliance, her father
being one of the crew of the flagship.</p>

<p>As she lay there she was concocting replies to
these and similar reproaches; and as her common
sense during the long period of their mutual acquaintance
had never been clouded by any intoxication
of the senses, she had it well in hand and knew how
to use it. The sounds of her husband's return filled her
with unalloyed pleasure. Presently the dining-room
door was slammed; a tremendous bellowing became
audible; she pushed her head underneath the bed-clothes
to smother her laughter. Heavy footsteps
crossed the adjacent room and the angry husband
appeared on the threshold, hat on head. His wife, who
was turning her back to him, called out in her most
dulcet tones:</p>

<p>"Is that you, little lubber? Come in, come in!"</p>

<p>The little lubber&mdash;this was a pet name, and husband
and wife frequently used others, even more original
ones&mdash;showed no inclination to accept her invitation,
but remained standing in the doorway and shouted:</p>

<p>"Why isn't the table laid for lunch?"</p>

<p>"Ask the girls; it isn't my business to lay the
table! But it's customary to take off one's hat on
coming into a room, sir!"</p>

<p>"What have you done with my cap?"</p>

<p>"Burnt it! It was so greasy, you ought to have
been ashamed to wear it."</p>

<p>"You burnt it? We'll talk about that later on!
Why are you lying in bed until all hours of the
morning, instead of supervising the girls?"</p>

<p>"Because I like it."</p>

<p>"Do you think I married a wife to have her
refusing to look after her house? What?"</p>

<p>"You did! But why do you think I married you?<span class="pagenum">[40]</span>
I've told you a thousand times&mdash;so that I shouldn't
have to work&mdash;and you promised me I shouldn't.
Didn't you? Can you swear, on your word of
honour, that you did <i>not</i> promise? That's the kind
of man you are! You are just like all the rest!"</p>

<p>"It was long ago!"</p>

<p>"Long ago? When was long ago? Is a promise
not binding for all times? Or must it be made in
any particular season?"</p>

<p>The husband knew this unanswerable logic only
too well, and his wife's good temper had the same
effect as her tears&mdash;he gave in.</p>

<p>"I'm going to have visitors to-night," he stated.</p>

<p>"Oh, indeed! Gentlemen?"</p>

<p>"Of course! I detest women."</p>

<p>"Well, I suppose you've ordered what you want?"</p>

<p>"No, I want you to do that."</p>

<p>"I? I've no money for entertaining. I shall
certainly not spend my housekeeping money on
your visitors."</p>

<p>"No, you prefer spending it on dress and other
useless things."</p>

<p>"Do you call the things I make for you useless?
Is a smoking-cap useless? Are slippers useless?
Tell me! Tell me candidly!"</p>

<p>She was an adept in formulating her questions in
such a way that the reply was bound to be crushing
for the person who had to answer them. She was
merely copying her husband's method. If he wanted
to avoid being crushed, he was compelled to keep
changing the subject of conversation.</p>

<p>"But I really have a very good reason for entertaining
a few guests to-night," he said with a show
of emotion; "my old friend, Fritz Levin, of the
Post Office, has been promoted after nineteen years'
service&mdash;I read it in the Postal Gazette last night.
But as you disapprove, and as I always give way
to you, I shall let the matter drop, and shall merely
ask Levin and schoolmaster Nyström to a little
supper in the counting-house." <span class="pagenum">[41]</span></p>

<p>"So that loafer Levin has been promoted? I
never! Perhaps now he'll pay you back all the
money he owes you?"</p>

<p>"I hope so!"</p>

<p>"I can't understand how on earth you can have
anything to do with that man! And the schoolmaster!
Beggars, both of them, who hardly own
the clothes they wear."</p>

<p>"I say, old girl, I never interfere in your affairs;
leave my business alone."</p>

<p>"If you have guests downstairs, I don't see why
I shouldn't have friends up here!"</p>

<p>"Well, why don't you?"</p>

<p>"All right, little lubber, give me some money then."</p>

<p>The little lubber, in every respect pleased with
the turn matters had taken, obeyed with pleasure.</p>

<p>"How much? I've very little cash to-day."</p>

<p>"Oh! Fifty'll do."</p>

<p>"Are you mad?"</p>

<p>"Mad? Give me what I ask for. Why should
I starve when you feast?"</p>

<p>Peace was established and the parties separated
with mutual satisfaction. There was no need for
him to lunch badly at home; he was compelled to go
out; no necessity to eat a poor dinner and be made
uncomfortable by the presence of ladies; he was
embarrassed in the company of women, for he had
been a bachelor too long; no reason to be troubled
by his conscience, for his wife would not be alone at
home; as it happened she wanted to invite her
own friends and be rid of him&mdash;it was worth fifty
crowns.</p>

<p>As soon as her husband had gone, Mrs. Falk
rang the bell; she had stayed in bed all the morning
to punish the housemaid, for the girl had remarked
that in the old days everybody used to be up at seven.
She asked for paper and ink and scribbled a note
to Mrs. Homan, the controller's wife, who lived in
the house opposite.<span class="pagenum">[42]</span></p>

<p><span class="smcap">Dear Evelyn</span>&mdash;the letter ran:</p>

<p>Come in this evening and have a cup of tea with
me; we can then discuss the statutes of the "Association
for the Rights of Women." Possibly a bazaar
or amateur theatricals would help us on. I am
longing to set the association going; it is an urgent
need, as you so often said; I feel it very deeply when
I think about it. Do you think that her Ladyship
would honour my house at the same time? Perhaps
I ought to call on her first. Come and fetch me
at twelve and we'll have a cup of chocolate at a
confectioner's. My husband is away.</p>


<div style="text-align: right">Yours affectionately,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />

<span class="smcap">Eugenia</span>.<br /></div>
<p>P.S. My husband is away.<br />
</p>

<p>When she had despatched the letter, she got up
and dressed, so as to be ready at twelve.<br /><br /></p>



<p>It was evening.</p>

<p>The eastern end of Long Street was already
plunged in twilight, when the clock of the German
church struck seven; only a faint ray of light from
Pig Street fell into Falk's flax-shop, as Andersson
made ready to close it for the night. The shutters
in the counting-house had already been fastened and
the gas was lighted. The place had been swept and
straightened; two hampers with protruding necks
of bottles, sealed red and yellow, some covered with
tinfoil and others wrapped in pink tissue paper,
were standing close to the door. The centre of the
room was taken up by a table covered with a white
cloth; on it stood an Indian bowl and a heavy silver
candelabrum.</p>

<p>Nicholas Falk paced up and down. He was wearing
a black frock-coat, and had a respectable as well as
a festive air. He had a right to look forward to a
pleasant evening: he had arranged it; he had paid
for it; he was in his own house and at his ease, for
there were no ladies present, and his invited guests
were of a calibre which justified him in expecting<span class="pagenum">[43]</span>
from them not only attention and civility, but a
little more.</p>

<p>They were only two, but he did not like many
people; they were his friends, reliable, devoted as
dogs; submissive, agreeable, always flattering and
never contradicting him.</p>

<p>Being a man of means, he could have moved in
better circles; he might have associated with his
father's friends, and he did so, twice a year; but he
was of too despotic a nature to get on with them.</p>

<p>It was three minutes past seven and still the guests
had not arrived. Falk began to show signs of impatience.
When he invited his henchmen, he expected
them to be punctual to the minute. The
thought of the unusually sumptuous arrangement,
however, and the paralysing impression it was
bound to make, helped him to control his temper
a little longer; at the lapse of a few more moments
Fritz Levin, the post-office official put in an appearance.</p>

<p>"Good-evening, brother&mdash;oh! I say!" He paused
in the action of divesting himself of his overcoat,
and feigned surprise at the magnificent preparations;
he almost seemed in danger of falling on his back
with sheer amazement. "The seven-armed candle-stick,
and the tabernacle! Good Lord!" he
ejaculated, catching sight of the hampers.</p>

<p>The individual who delivered these well-rehearsed
witticisms while taking off his overcoat, was a middle-aged
man of the type of the government official of
twenty years ago; his whiskers joined his moustache,
his hair was parted at the side and arranged in a
<i>coup de vent</i>. He was extremely pale and as thin
as a shroud. In spite of being well dressed, he
was shivering with cold and seemed to have secret
traffic with poverty.</p>

<p>Falk's manner in welcoming him was both rude
and patronizing; it was partly intended to express
his scorn of flattery, more particularly from an
individual like the newcomer, and partly to intimate<span class="pagenum">[44]</span>
that the newcomer enjoyed the privilege of his friendship.</p>

<p>By way of congratulation he began to draw a
parallel between Levin's promotion and his own
father's receiving a commission in the militia.</p>

<p>"Well, it's a grand thing to have the royal mandate
in one's pocket, isn't it? My father, too, received
a royal mandate...."</p>

<p>"Pardon me, dear brother, but I've only been
appointed."</p>

<p>"Appointed or royal mandate, it comes to the
same thing. Don't teach me! My father, too, had
a royal mandate...."</p>

<p>"I assure you...."</p>

<p>"Assure me&mdash;what d'you mean by that? D'you
mean to imply that I'm standing here telling lies?
Tell me, do you mean to say that I'm lying?"</p>

<p>"Of course I don't! There's no need to lose
your temper like that!"</p>

<p>"Very well! You're admitting that I'm not
telling lies, consequently you have a royal mandate.
Why do you talk such nonsense? My father...."</p>

<p>The pale man, in whose wake a drove of furies
seemed to have entered the counting-house&mdash;for he
trembled in every limb&mdash;now rushed at his patron,
firmly resolved to get over with his business before
the feast began, so that nothing should afterwards
disturb the general enjoyment.</p>

<p>"Help me," he groaned, with the despair of a
drowning man, taking a bill out of his pocket.</p>

<p>Falk sat down on the sofa, shouted for Andersson,
ordered him to open the bottles and began to mix
the bowl.</p>

<p>"Help you? Haven't I helped you before?"
he replied. "Haven't you borrowed from me again
and again without paying me back? Answer me!
What have you got to say?"</p>

<p>"I know, brother, that you have always been
kindness itself to me."</p>

<p>"And now you've been promoted, haven't you?<span class="pagenum">[45]</span>
Everything was to be all right now; all debts were
to be paid and a new life was to begin. I've listened
to this kind of talk for eighteen years. What salary
do you draw now?"</p>

<p>"Twelve hundred crowns instead of eight hundred
as before. But now, think of this: the cost
of the mandate was one hundred and twenty-five;
the pension fund deducts fifty; that makes
one hundred and seventy-five. Where I am to take
it from? But the worst of it all is this: my creditors
have seized half my salary; consequently I have
now only six hundred crowns to live on instead
of eight hundred&mdash;and I've waited nineteen years
for that. Promotion is a splendid thing!"</p>

<p>"Why did you get into debt? One ought never
to get into debt. Never&mdash;get&mdash;into debt."</p>

<p>"With a salary of eight hundred crowns all these
years! How was it possible to keep out of it?"</p>

<p>"In that case you had no business to be in the
employ of the Government. But this is a matter
which doesn't concern me; doesn't&mdash;concern&mdash;me."</p>

<p>"Won't you sign once more? For the last time?"</p>

<p>"You know my principles; I never sign bills.
Please let the matter drop."</p>

<p>Levin, who was evidently used to these refusals,
calmed down. At the same moment schoolmaster
Nyström entered, and, to the relief of both parties,
interrupted the conversation. He was a dried-up
individual of mysterious appearance and age. His
occupation, too, was mysterious; he was supposed
to be a master at a school in one of the southern
suburbs&mdash;nobody ever asked which school and he
did not care to talk about it. His mission, so far
as Falk was concerned, was first to be addressed
as schoolmaster when there were other people present;
secondly, to be polite and submissive; thirdly, to
borrow a little every now and then; never exceeding
a fiver; it was one of Falk's fundamental needs that
people should borrow money from him occasionally,<span class="pagenum">[46]</span>
only a little, of course; and, fourthly, to write verses
on festive occasions; and the latter was not the
least of the component parts of his mission.</p>

<p>Charles Nicholas Falk sat enthroned on his leather
sofa, very conscious of the fact that it was <i>his</i> leather
sofa, surrounded by his staff; or his dogs, as one
might have said. Levin found everything splendid;
the bowl, the glasses, the ladle, the cigars&mdash;the
whole box had been taken from the mantelpiece&mdash;the
matches, the ash-trays, the bottles, the corks,
the wire&mdash;everything. The schoolmaster looked
content; he was not called upon to talk, the other
two did that; he was merely required to be present
as a witness in case of need.</p>

<p>Falk was the first to raise his glass and drink&mdash;nobody
knew to whom&mdash;but the schoolmaster, believing
it to be to the hero of the day, produced
his verses and began to read "To Fritz Levin on
the Day of his Promotion."</p>

<p>Falk was attacked by a violent cough which
disturbed the reading and spoiled the effect of the
wittiest points; but Nyström, who was a shrewd
man and had foreseen this, had introduced into
his poem the finely felt and finely expressed reflection:
"What would have become of Fritz Levin
if Charles Nicholas hadn't befriended him?" This
subtle hint at the numerous loans made by Falk
to his friend, soothed the cough; it subsided and
ensured a better reception to the last verse which
was quite impudently dedicated to Levin, a tactlessness
which again threatened to disturb the harmony.
Falk emptied his glass as if he were draining a cup
filled to the brim with ingratitude.</p>

<p>"You're not up to the mark, Nyström," he
said.</p>

<p>"No, he was far wittier on your thirty-eighth
birthday," agreed Levin, guessing what Falk was
driving at.</p>

<p>Falk's glance penetrated into the most hidden
recesses of Levin's soul, trying to discover whether<span class="pagenum">[47]</span>
any lie or fraud lay hidden there&mdash;and as his eyes
were blinded by pride, he saw nothing.</p>

<p>"Quite true," he acquiesced: "I never heard
anything more witty in all my life; it was good
enough to be printed; you really ought to get your
things printed. I say, Nyström, surely you know
it by heart, don't you?"</p>

<p>Nyström had a shocking memory, or, to tell the
truth, he had not yet had enough wine to commit
the suggested outrage against decency and good form;
he asked for time. But Falk, irritated by his quiet
resistance, had gone too far to turn back, and insisted
on his request. He was almost sure that he had a
copy of the verses with him; he searched his pocket-book
and behold! There they lay. Modesty did
not forbid him to read them aloud himself; it would
not have been for the first time; but it sounded
better for another to read them. The poor dog bit his
chain, but it held. He was a sensitive man, this
schoolmaster, but he had to be brutal if he did
not want to relinquish the precious gift of life, and
he had been very brutal. The most private affairs
were fully and openly discussed, everything in
connexion with the birth of the hero, his reception
into the community, his education and up-bringing
were made fun of; the verses would have disgusted
even Falk himself if they had treated of any other
person, but the fact of their celebrating him and
his doings made them excellent. When the recitation
was over, his health was drunk uproariously,
in many glasses, for each member of the little party
felt that he was too sober to keep his real feelings
under control.</p>

<p>The table was now cleared and an excellent supper
consisting of oysters, birds, and other good things,
was served. Falk went sniffing from dish to dish,
sent one or two of them back, took care that the
chill was taken off the stout, and that the wines
were the right temperature. Now his dogs were
called upon to do their work and offer him a pleasant<span class="pagenum">[48]</span>
spectacle. When everybody was ready, he pulled out
his gold watch and held it in his hand while he
jestingly asked a question which his convives had
heard many times&mdash;so very many times:</p>

<p>"What is the time by the silver watches of the
gentlemen?"</p>

<p>The anticipated reply came as in duty bound,
accompanied by gay laughter: the watches were
at the watch-maker's. This put Falk into the best
of tempers, which found expression in the not at
all unexpected joke:</p>

<p>"The animals will be fed at eight."</p>

<p>He sat down, poured out three liqueurs, took one
and invited his friends to follow his example.</p>

<p>"I must make a beginning myself, as you both seem
to be holding back. Don't let's stand on ceremony!
Tuck in boys!"</p>

<p>The feeding began. Charles Nicholas who was not
particularly hungry, had plenty of time to enjoy
the appetite of his guests, and he continually urged
them to eat. An unspeakably benevolent smile
radiated from his bright, sunny countenance as he
watched their zeal, and it was difficult to say what
he enjoyed more, the fact of their having a good
meal, or the fact of their being so hungry. He
sat there like a coachman on his box, clicking his
tongue and cracking his whip at them.</p>

<p>"Eat, Nyström! You don't know when you'll get
a meal next. Help yourself, Levin; you look as
if you could do with a little flesh on your bones.
Are you grinning at the oysters? Aren't they good
enough for a fellow like you? What do you say?
Take another! Don't be shy! What do you say?
You've had enough? Nonsense! Have a drink now!
Take some stout, boys! Now a little more salmon!
You <i>shall</i> take another piece, by the Lord Harry,
you shall! Go on eating! Why the devil don't
you? It costs you nothing!"</p>

<p>When the birds had been carved, Charles Nicholas
poured out the claret with a certain solemnity. The<span class="pagenum">[49]</span>
guests paused, anticipating a speech. The host
raised his glass, smelt the bouquet of the wine and
said with profound gravity:</p>

<p>"Your health, you hogs!"</p>

<p>Nyström responded by raising his glass and
drinking; but Levin left his untouched, looking
as if he were secretly sharpening a knife.</p>

<p>When supper was over Levin, strengthened by
food and drink, his senses befogged by the fumes
of the wine, began to nurse a feeling of independence;
a strong yearning for freedom stirred in his heart.
His voice grew more resonant; he pronounced his
words with increasing assurance, and his movements
betrayed greater ease.</p>

<p>"Give me a cigar!" he said in a commanding
tone; "no, not a weed like these, a good one."</p>

<p>Charles Nicholas, regarding his words as a good
joke, obeyed.</p>

<p>"Your brother isn't here to-night," remarked
Levin casually. There was something ominous and
threatening in his voice; Falk felt it and became
uneasy.</p>

<p>"No!" he said shortly, but his voice was unsteady.</p>

<p>Levin waited for a few moments before striking a
second blow. One of his most lucrative occupations
was his interference in other people's business;
he carried gossip from family to family; sowed a
grain of discord here and another there, merely to play
the grateful part of the mediator afterwards. In
this way he had obtained a great deal of influence,
was feared by his acquaintances, and managed them
as if they were marionettes.</p>

<p>Falk felt this disagreeable influence and attempted
to shake it off; but in vain. Levin knew how to
whet his curiosity; and by hinting at more than he
knew, he succeeded in bluffing people into betraying
their secrets.</p>

<p>At the present moment Levin held the whip and
he promised himself to make his oppressor feel it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_50" id="Page_50">[50]</a></span>.
He was still merely playing with it, but Falk was
waiting for the blow. He tried to change the subject
of conversation. He urged his friends to drink
and they drank. Levin grew whiter and colder as
his intoxication increased, and went on playing with
his victim.</p>

<p>"Your wife has visitors this evening," he suddenly
remarked.</p>

<p>"How do you know?" asked Falk, taken aback.</p>

<p>"I know everything," answered Levin, showing his
teeth. It was almost true; his widely extending
business connexions compelled him to visit as many
public places as possible, and there he heard much;
not only the things which were spoken of in his
society, but also those which were discussed by others.</p>

<p>Falk was beginning to feel afraid without knowing
why, and he thought it best to divert the threatening
danger. He became civil, humble even, but Levin's
boldness still increased. There was no alternative,
he must make a speech, remind his companions of
the cause of the gathering, acknowledge the hero
of the day. There was no other escape. He was
a poor speaker, but the thing had to be done. He
tapped against the bowl, filled the glasses, and
recollecting an old speech, made by his father when
Falk became his own master, he rose and began, very
slowly:</p>

<p>"Gentlemen! I have been my own master these
eight years; I was only thirty years old...."</p>

<p>The change from a sitting position to a standing
one caused a rush of blood to his head; he became
confused; Levin's mocking glances added to his
embarrassment. His confusion grew; the figure
thirty seemed something so colossal that it completely
disconcerted him.</p>

<p>"Did I say thirty? I didn't&mdash;mean it. I was
in my father's employ&mdash;for many years. It would
take too long to recount everything&mdash;I suffered
during those years; it's the common lot. Perhaps
you think me selfish...." <span class="pagenum">[51]</span></p>

<p>"Hear! hear!" groaned Nyström who was
resting his heavy head on the table.</p>

<p>Levin puffed the smoke of his cigar in the direction
of the speaker, as if he were spitting in his face.</p>

<p>Falk, really intoxicated now, continued his speech;
his eyes seemed to seek a distant goal without being
able to find it.</p>

<p>"Everybody is selfish, we all know that. Ye-es!
My father, who made a speech when I became my
own master, as I was just saying&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>He pulled out his gold watch and took it off the
chain. The two listeners opened their eyes wide.
Was he going to make a present of it to Levin?</p>

<p>"Handed me on that occasion this gold watch
which he, in his turn, had received from his father
in the year...."</p>

<p>Again those dreadful figures&mdash;he must refer back.</p>

<p>"This gold watch, gentlemen, was presented to
me, and I cannot think without emotion of the
moment&mdash;when I received it. Perhaps you think
I'm selfish gentlemen? I'm not. I know it's not
good form to speak of oneself, but on such an occasion
as this it seems very natural to glance at&mdash;the past.
I only want to mention one little incident."</p>

<p>He had forgotten Levin and the significance of the
day and was under the impression that he was
celebrating the close of his bachelor-life. All of
a sudden he remembered the scene between himself
and his brother, and his triumph. He felt a pressing
need to talk of this triumph, but he could not
remember the details. He merely remembered having
proved that his brother was a blackguard; he had
forgotten the chain of evidence with the exception
of only two facts: his brother and a blackguard:
he tried to link them together, but they always fell
apart. His brain worked incessantly and picture
followed on picture. He must tell them of a generous
action he had done; he recollected that he had
given his wife some money in the morning, and had
allowed her to sleep as long as she liked and have<span class="pagenum">[52]</span>
breakfast in bed; but that wasn't a suitable subject.
He was in an unpleasant position, but fear of a
silence and the two pairs of sharp eyes which followed
his every movement, helped him to pull himself
together. He realized that he was still standing,
watch in hand. The watch? How had it got into
his hand? Why were his friends sitting down,
almost blotted out by the smoke, while he was on
his legs? Oh! of course! He had been telling
them about the watch, and they were waiting for
the continuation of the story.</p>

<p>"This watch, gentlemen, is nothing special at all.
It's only French gold."</p>

<p>The two whilom owners of silver watches opened
their eyes wide. This information was new to them.</p>

<p>"And I believe it has only seven rubies&mdash;it's
not a good watch at all&mdash;on the contrary&mdash;I should
rather call it a cheap one...."</p>

<p>Some secret cause of which his brain was hardly
conscious, made him angry; he must vent his
wrath on something; tapping the table with his
watch, he shouted:</p>

<p>"It's a damned bad watch, I say! Listen to me
when I'm speaking! Don't you believe what I say,
Fritz? Answer me! Why do you look so vicious?
You don't believe me. I can read it in your eyes.
Fritz, you don't believe what I'm saying. Believe
me, I know human nature. And I might stand
security for you once more! Either you are a liar, or
I am! Shall I prove to you that you are a scoundrel?
Shall I? Listen, Nyström, if&mdash;I&mdash;forge a bill&mdash;am I
a scoundrel?"</p>

<p>"Of course you are a scoundrel, the devil take you!"
answered Nyström, without a moment's hesitation.</p>

<p>"Yes&mdash;Yes!"</p>

<p>His efforts to remember whether Levin had forged
a bill, or was in any way connected with a bill, were in
vain. Therefore he was obliged to let the matter
drop. Levin was tired; he was also afraid that
his victim might lose consciousness, and that he and<span class="pagenum">[53]</span>
Nyström would be robbed of the pleasure of enjoying
his intended discomfiture. He therefore interrupted
Falk with a jest in his host's own style.</p>

<p>"Your health, old rascal!"</p>

<p>And down came the whip. He produced a newspaper.</p>

<p>"Have you seen the <i>People's Flag</i>?" he asked
Falk in cold murderous accents.</p>

<p>Falk stared at the scandalous paper but said
nothing. The inevitable was bound to happen.</p>

<p>"It contains a splendid article on the Board of
Payment of Employés' Salaries."</p>

<p>Falk's cheeks grew white.</p>

<p>"Rumour has it that your brother wrote it."</p>

<p>"It's a lie! My brother's no scandal-monger!
He isn't! D'you hear?"</p>

<p>"But unfortunately he had to suffer for it. I'm
told he's been sacked."</p>

<p>"It's a lie!"</p>

<p>"I'm afraid it's true. Moreover, I saw him dining
to-day at the 'Brass-Button' with a rascally looking
chap. I'm sorry for the lad."</p>

<p>It was the worst blow that could have befallen
Charles Nicholas. He was disgraced. His name,
his father's name, was dishonoured; all that the
old burgesses had achieved had been in vain. If
he had been told that his wife had died, he could
have borne up under it; a financial loss, too, might
have been repaired. If he had been told that his
friend Levin, or Nyström, had been arrested for
forgery, he would have disowned them, for he had
never shown himself in public in their company.
But he could not deny his relationship to his brother.
And his brother had disgraced him. There was no
getting away from the fact.</p>

<p>Levin had found a certain pleasure in retailing his
information. Falk, although he had never given
his brother the smallest encouragement, was in the
habit of boasting of him and his achievements to his
friends. "My brother, the assessor, is a man of<span class="pagenum">[54]</span>
brains, and he'll go far, mark my words!" These
continual indirect reproaches had long been a source
of irritation to Levin, more particularly as Charles
Nicholas drew a definite, unsurpassable, although
indefinable, line between assessors and secretaries.</p>

<p>Levin, without moving a finger in the matter, had
had his revenge at so little cost to himself that
he could afford to be generous, and play the part of
the comforter.</p>

<p>"There's no reason why you should take it so
much to heart. Even a journalist can be a decent
specimen of humanity, and you exaggerate the
scandal. There can be no scandal where no definite
individuals have been attacked. Moreover, the
whole thing's very witty, and everybody's reading
it."</p>

<p>This last pill of comfort made Falk furious.</p>

<p>"He's robbed me of my good name! My name!
How can I show myself to-morrow at the Exchange?
What will people say?"</p>

<p>By people he meant his wife. She would enjoy
the situation because it would make the misalliance
less marked. Henceforth they would be on the same
social level. The thought was intolerable. A bitter
hatred for all mankind took possession of his soul.
If only he had been the bastard's father! Then
he could have made use of his parental privilege,
washed his hands of him, cursed him, and so have
put an end to the matter; but there was no such
thing as a brotherly privilege. Was it possible
that he himself, was partly to blame for the disgrace?
Had he not forced his brother into his profession?
Maybe the scene of the morning or his brother's financial
difficulties&mdash;caused by him&mdash;were to blame? No! he
had never committed a base action; he was blameless;
he was respected and looked up to; he was
no scandal-monger; he had never been sacked by
anybody. Did he not carry a paper in his pocket-book,
testifying that he was the kindest friend with
the kindest heart? Had not the schoolmaster read<span class="pagenum">[55]</span>
it aloud a little while ago? Yes, certainly&mdash;and he
sat down to drink, drink immoderately&mdash;not to stupefy
his conscience, there was no necessity for that, he
had done no wrong, but merely to drown his anger.
But it was no use; it boiled over&mdash;and scalded those
who sat nearest to him.</p>

<p>"Drink, you rascals! That brute there's asleep!
And you call yourselves friends! Waken him up,
Levin!"</p>

<p>"Whom are you shouting at?" asked the offended
Levin peevishly.</p>

<p>"At you, of course!"</p>

<p>Two glances were exchanged across the table
which promised no good. Falk, whose temper
improved directly he saw another man in a rage,
poured a ladleful of the contents of the bowl on the
schoolmaster's head, so that it trickled down his
neck behind his collar.</p>

<p>"Don't dare to do that again!" threatened
Levin.</p>

<p>"Who's to prevent me?"</p>

<p>"I! Yes, I! I shan't let you ruin his clothes.
It's a beastly shame!"</p>

<p>"His clothes," laughed Falk. "Isn't it my coat?
Didn't I give it to him?"</p>

<p>"You're going too far!" said Levin, rising to go.</p>

<p>"So you're going now! You've had enough to
eat, you can't drink any more, you don't want me
any longer to-night. Didn't you want to borrow a
fiver? What? Am I to be deprived of the honour
of lending you some money? Didn't you want me
to sign something? Sign, eh?"</p>

<p>At the word sign, Levin pricked up his ears.
Supposing he tried to get the better of him in his
excited condition? The thought softened him.</p>

<p>"Don't be unjust, brother," he re-commenced.
"I'm not ungrateful; I fully appreciate your kindness;
but I'm poor, poorer than you've ever been,
or ever can be; I've suffered humiliations which you
can't even conceive; but I've always looked upon<span class="pagenum">[56]</span>
you as a friend. I mean a friend in the highest
sense of the word. You've had too much to drink
to-night and so you're cross; this makes you unjust,
but I assure you, gentlemen, in the whole world there
beats no kinder heart than that of Charles Nicholas.
And I don't say this for the first time. I thank you
for your courtesy to-night, that is to say, if the
excellent supper we have eaten, the magnificent wines
we have drunk, have been eaten and drunk in my
honour. I thank you, brother, and drink your
health. Here's to you, brother Charles Nicholas!
Thank you, thank you a thousand times! You've
not done it in vain! Mark my words!"</p>

<p>Strange to say, these words, spoken in a tremulous
voice&mdash;tremulous with emotion&mdash;produced good
results. Falk felt good. Hadn't he again been
assured that he had a kind heart? He firmly
believed it.</p>

<p>The intoxication had reached the sentimental
stage; they moved nearer together; they talked
of their good qualities, of the wickedness of the
world, the warmth of their feelings, the strength
of their good intentions; they grasped each other's
hands. Falk spoke of his wife; of his kindness to
her; he regretted the lack of spirituality in his
calling; he mentioned how painfully aware he was
of his want of culture; he said that his life was a
failure; and after the consumption of his tenth
liqueur, he confided to Levin that it had been his
ambition to go into the church, become a missionary,
even. They grew more and more spiritual. Levin
spoke of his dead mother, her death and funeral,
of an unhappy love-affair, and finally of his religious
convictions, as a rule jealously guarded as a secret.
And soon they were launched on an eager discussion
of religion.</p>

<p>It struck one&mdash;it struck two&mdash;and they were still
talking while Nyström slept soundly, his arms on the
table, and his head resting on his arms. A dense
cloud of tobacco smoke filled the counting-house and<span class="pagenum">[57]</span>
robbed the gas flames of their brilliancy. The seven
candles of the seven-armed candelabrum had burnt
down to the sockets and the table presented a dismal
sight. One or two glasses had lost their stems, the
stained tablecloth was covered with cigar ash, the
floor was strewn with matches. The daylight was
breaking through the chinks of the shutters; its
shafts pierced the cloud of smoke and drew cabbalistic
figures on the tablecloth between the two champions
of their faith, busily engaged in re-editing the Augsburg
Confession. They were now talking with hissing
voices; their brains were numbed; their words sounded
dry, the tension was relaxing in spite of their diligent
recourse to the bottle. They tried to whip up their
souls into an ecstasy, but their efforts grew weaker
and weaker; the spirit had died out of their conversation;
they only exchanged meaningless words;
the stupefied brains which had been whirling round
like teetotums, slackened in their speed and finally
stopped; one thought alone filled their minds&mdash;they
must go to bed, if they did not want to loathe
the sight of each other; they must be alone.</p>

<p>Nyström was shaken into consciousness; Levin
embraced Charles Nicholas and took the opportunity
to pocket three of his cigars. The heights which
they had scaled were too sublime to allow them
to talk of the bill just yet. They parted&mdash;the host
let his guests out&mdash;he was alone! He opened the
shutters&mdash;daylight poured into the room; he opened
the window; the cool sea-breeze swept through the
narrow street, one side of which was already illuminated
by the rising sun. It struck four, he listened to
that wonderful striking only heard by the poor
wretch who yearns for the day on a bed of sickness
or sorrow. Even Long Street East, that street of
vice, of filth and brawls, lay in the early morning
sun, still, desolate and pure. Falk felt deeply
unhappy. He was disgraced&mdash;he was lonely! He
closed window and shutters, and as he turned round
and beheld the state of the room, he at once began<span class="pagenum">[58]</span>
setting it straight. He picked up the cigar ends
and threw them into the grate; he cleared the
table, swept the room, dusted it and put everything
in its place. He washed his face and hands, and brushed
his hair; a policeman might have thought him a
murderer, intent on effacing all traces of his crime.
But all the while he thought, clearly, firmly and
logically. When he had straightened the room and
himself, he formed a resolution, long brooded over,
but now to be carried into effect. He would wipe away
the disgrace which had fallen on his family; he
would rise in the world and become a well-known
and influential man; he would begin a new life;
he would keep his reputation unstained and he
would make his name respected. He felt that
only a great ambition could help him to keep his
head erect after the blow he had received to-night.
Ambition had been latent in his heart; it had been
awakened and henceforth it should rule his life.</p>

<p>Quite sober now, he lighted a cigar, drank a brandy,
and went upstairs, quietly, gently, so as not to disturb
his sleeping wife.<span class="pagenum">[59]</span></p>

<p class="break"></p>


 <h2><a name="CHAPTER_V" id="CHAPTER_V"></a>CHAPTER V</h2>

<h3>AT THE PUBLISHER'S</h3>


<p>Arvid Falk decided to try Smith first, the almighty
Smith&mdash;a name adopted by the publisher in his
youth during a short trip to the great continent,
from exaggerated admiration of everything American&mdash;the
redoubtable Smith with his thousand arms who
could <i>make</i> a writer in twelve months, however bad
the original material. His method was well known,
though none but he dared to make use of it, for it
required an unparalleled amount of impudence.
The writer whom he took up could be sure of making
a name; hence Smith was overrun with nameless
writers.</p>

<p>The following story is told as an instance of his
irresistible power and capacity for starting an author
on the road to fame. A young, inexperienced writer
submitted his first novel, a bad one, to Smith. For
some reason the latter happened to like the first
chapter&mdash;he never read more&mdash;and decided to bless
the world with a new author. The book was published
bearing on the back of the cover the words: "Blood
and Sword. A novel by Gustav Sjöholm. This
work of the young and promising author whose
highly respected name has for a long time been
familiar to the widest circles, etc. etc. It is a book
which we can strongly recommend to the novel-reading
public." The book was published on April 3.
On April 4, a review appeared in the widely read
metropolitan paper the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>, in which
Smith held fifty shares. It concluded by saying:
"Gustav Sjöholm's name is already well known;<span class="pagenum">[60]</span>
the spreading of his fame does not lie with us; and
we recommend this book not only to the novel-reading,
but also to the novel-writing public." On
April 5 an advertisement appeared in every paper
of the capital with the following quotation: "Gustav
Sjöholm's name is already well known; the spreading
of his fame does not lie with us. (<i>Grey Bonnet</i>)."
On the same evening a notice appeared in the <i>Incorruptible</i>,
a paper read by nobody. It represented
the book as a model of bad literature, and the reviewer
swore that Gustav Sjöblom (reviewer's intentional
slip), had no name at all. But as nobody
read the <i>Incorruptible</i>, the opposition remained unheard.
The other papers, unwilling to disagree with
the venerable leading <i>Grey Bonnet</i>, and afraid of
offending Smith, were mild in their criticisms, but
no more. They held the view that with hard work
Gustav Sjöholm might make a name for himself in
the future. A few days of silence followed, but in
every paper&mdash;in the <i>Incorruptible</i> in bold type&mdash;appeared
the advertisement, shouting: "Gustav
Sjöholm's name is already well known." Then a
correspondence was started in the <i>X-köpings Miscellaneous</i>,
reproaching the metropolitan papers with
being hard on young authors. "Gustav Sjöholm is
simply a genius," affirmed the hot-headed correspondent,
"in spite of all that dogmatic blockheads might
say to the contrary." On the next day the advertisement
again appeared in all the papers, bawling:
"Gustav Sjöholm's name is already well known, etc.
(<i>Grey Bonnet</i>)." "Gustav Sjöholm is a genius, etc.
(<i>X-köpings Miscellaneous</i>)." The cover of the next
number of the magazine <i>Our Land</i>, one of Smith's
publications, bore the notice: "We are pleased
to be in a position to inform our numerous subscribers
that the brilliant young author Gustav Sjöholm
has promised us an original novel for our next
number, etc." And then again the advertisement in
the papers. Finally, when at Christmas the almanac
<i>Our People</i> appeared, the authors mentioned on the<span class="pagenum">[61]</span>
title page were: Orvar Odd, Talis Qualis, Gustav
Sjöholm, and others. It was a fact. In the eighth
month Gustav Sjöholm was made. And the public
was powerless. It had to swallow him. It was
impossible to go into a bookseller's and look at a
book without reading his name; impossible to take
up a newspaper without coming across it. In all
circumstances and conditions of life that name
obtruded itself, printed on a slip of paper; it was
put into the housewives' market baskets on Saturdays;
the servants carried it home from the tradespeople;
the crossing-sweeper swept it off the street, and the
man of leisure went about with it in the pockets of
his dressing-gown.</p>

<p>Being well aware of Smith's great power, the young
man climbed the dark stairs of the publisher's house
close to the Great Church, not without misgivings.
He had to wait for a long time in an outer office,
a prey to the most unpleasant meditations, until
suddenly the door was burst open and a young man
rushed out of an inner office, despair on his face and
a roll of paper under his arm. Shaking in every
limb, Falk entered the sanctum, where the despot
received his visitors, seated on a low sofa, calm and
serene as a god; he kindly nodded his grey head,
covered by a blue cap, and went on smoking, peacefully,
as if he had never shattered a man's hopes or
turned an unhappy wretch from his door.</p>

<p>"Good morning, sir, good morning!"</p>

<p>His divinely flashing eyes glanced at the newcomer's
clothes and approved; nevertheless he did
not ask him to sit down.</p>

<p>"My name is&mdash;Falk."</p>

<p>"Unknown to me! What is your father?"</p>

<p>"My father is dead."</p>

<p>"Is he? Good! What can I do for you, sir?"</p>

<p>Falk produced a manuscript from his breast
pocket and handed it to Smith; the latter sat on it
without looking at it.</p>

<p>"You want me to publish it? Verse? I might<span class="pagenum">[62]</span>
have guessed it! Do you know the cost of printing
a single page, sir? No, you don't."</p>

<p>And he playfully poked the ignoramus with the
stem of his pipe.</p>

<p>"Have you made a name, sir? No! Have you
distinguished yourself in any way? No!"</p>

<p>"The Academy has praised these verses."</p>

<p>"Which Academy? The Academy of Sciences?
The one which publishes all that stuff about flints?"</p>

<p>"About flints?"</p>

<p>"Yes, you know the Academy of Sciences! Close
to the Museum, near the river. Well, then!"</p>

<p>"Oh, no, Mr. Smith! The Swedish Academy, in
the Exchange...."</p>

<p>"I see! The one with the tallow candles!
Never mind; no man on earth can tell what purpose
it serves! No, my dear sir, the essential thing is to
have a name, a name like Tegnér, like Ohrenschlägel,
like&mdash;Yes! Our country has many great poets, but
I can't remember them just at the moment; but a
name is necessary. Mr. Falk? H'm! Who knows
Mr. Falk? I don't, and I know many great poets.
As I recently said to my friend Ibsen: 'Now just
you listen to me, Ibsen'&mdash;I call him Ibsen, quite
plainly&mdash;'just you listen to me, write something for
my magazine. I'll pay you whatever you ask!'
He wrote&mdash;I paid&mdash;but I got my money back."</p>

<p>The annihilated young man longed to sink through
the chinks in the floor when he realized that he was
standing before a person who called Ibsen quite
plainly "Ibsen." He longed to recover his manuscript,
and go his way, as the other young man had
done, away, far away, until he came to running water.
Smith guessed it.</p>

<p>"Well, I've no doubt you can write Swedish, sir.
And you know our literature better than I do. Good!
I have an idea. I am told of great, beautiful,
spiritual writers who lived in the past, let's say in
the reign of Gustav Eriksson and his daughter
Christina. Isn't that so?" <span class="pagenum">[63]</span></p>

<p>"Gustavus Adolfus."</p>

<p>"Gustavus Adolfus, so be it! I remember there
was one with a great, a very great name; he wrote
a fine work in verse, on God's Creation, I believe!
His Christian name was Hokan!"</p>

<p>"You mean Haquin Spegel, Mr. Smith! 'God's
Works and Rest.'"</p>

<p>"Ah, yes! Well, I've been thinking of publishing
it. Our nation is yearning for religion these days;
I've noticed that; and one must give the people
something. I have given them a good deal of
Hermann Francke and Arndt, but the great Foundation
can sell more cheaply than I can, and now I want
to bring out something good at a fair price. Will
you take the matter in hand?"</p>

<p>"I don't know where I come in, as it is but a
question of a reprint," answered Falk, not daring to
refuse straight out.</p>

<p>"Dear me, what ignorance! You would do the
editing and proof-reading, of course. Are we agreed?
You publish it, sir! What? Shall we draw up a
little agreement? The work must appear in numbers.
What? A little agreement. Just hand me pen and
ink. Well?"</p>

<p>Falk obeyed; he was unable to offer resistance.
Smith wrote and Falk signed.</p>

<p>"Well, so much for that! Now, there's another
thing! Give me that little book on the stand!
The third shelf! There! Now look here! A
brochure&mdash;title: "The Guardian Angel." Look at
the vignette! An angel with an anchor and a ship&mdash;it's
a schooner without any yards, I believe! The
splendid influence of marine insurance on social life
in general is well known. Everybody has at one
time or other sent something more or less valuable
across the sea in a ship. What? Well! Everybody
doesn't realize this. No! Consequently it is our
duty to enlighten those who are ignorant; isn't
that so? Well! We know, you and I; therefore
it is for us to enlighten those who don't. This book<span class="pagenum">[64]</span>
maintains that everybody who sends things across
the water should insure them. But this book is
badly written. Well! We'll write a better one.
What? You'll write me a novel of ten pages for my
magazine <i>Our Land</i>, and I expect you to have
sufficient gumption to introduce the name <i>Triton</i>&mdash;which
is the name of a new limited liability company,
founded by my nephew, and we are told to help our
neighbours&mdash;twice, neither more nor less; but it
must be done cleverly and so that it is not at all
obvious. Do you follow me?"</p>

<p>Falk found the offer repulsive, although it contained
nothing dishonest; however, it gave him a
start with the influential man, straight away, without
any effort on his part. He thanked Smith and
accepted.</p>

<p>"You know the size? Sixteen inches to the page,
altogether a hundred and sixty inches of eight lines
each. Shall we write a little agreement?"</p>

<p>Smith drew up an agreement and Falk signed.</p>

<p>"Well, now! You know the history of Sweden?
Go to the stand again&mdash;you will find a cliché there,
a wood block. To the right! That's it! Can you
tell me who the lady is meant for? She is supposed
to be a queen."</p>

<p>Falk, who saw nothing at first but a piece of black
wood, finally made out some human features and
declared that to the best of his belief it represented
Ulrica Eleonora.</p>

<p>"Didn't I say so? Hihihi! The block has been
used for Elizabeth, Queen of England, in an American
popular edition. I've bought it cheaply, with a
lot of others. I'm going to use it for Ulrica Eleonora
in my <i>People's Library</i>. Our people are splendid;
they are so ready to buy my books. Will you write
the letterpress?"</p>

<p>Although Falk did not like the order, his super-sensitive
conscience could find no wrong in the
proposal.</p>

<p>"Well then! We'd better make out a little<span class="pagenum">[65]</span>
agreement. Sixteen pages octavo, at three inches,
at twenty-four lines each. There!"</p>

<p>Falk, realizing that the audience was over, made
a movement to recover his manuscript on which
Smith had all along been sitting. But the latter
would not give it up; he declared that he would read
it, although it might take him some time.</p>

<p>"You're a sensible man, sir, who knows the value
of time," he said. "I had a young fellow here just
before you came in; he also brought me verses, a
great poem, for which I have no use. I made him
the same offers I just made to you, sir; do you know
what he said? He told me to do something unmentionable.
He did, indeed, and rushed out of the
office. He'll not live long, that young man! Good
day, good day! Don't forget to order a copy of
Hoken Spegel! Well, good day, good day."</p>

<p>Smith pointed to the door with the stem of his
pipe and Falk left him.</p>

<p>He did not walk away with light footsteps. The
wood-block in his pocket was heavy and weighed him
down, kept him back. He thought of the pale
young man with the roll of manuscript who had
dared to say a bold thing to Smith, and pride stirred
in his heart. But memories of old paternal warnings
and advice whispered the old lie to him that all work
was equally honourable, and reproved him for his
pride. He laid hold of his common sense and went
home to write a hundred and ninety-two inches
about Ulrica Eleonora.</p>

<p>As he had risen early he was at his writing-table
at nine o'clock. He filled a large pipe, took two
sheets of paper, wiped his steel nibs and tried to
recall all he knew about Ulrica Eleonora. He looked
her up in Ekelund and Fryxell. There was a great
deal under the heading Ulrica Eleonora, but very
little about her personally. At half-past nine he had
exhausted the subject. He had written down her
birthplace, and the place where she died, when she
came to the throne, when she abdicated, the names<span class="pagenum">[66]</span>
of her parents and the name of her husband. It was
a commonplace excerpt from a church register&mdash;and
filled three pages, leaving thirteen to be covered.
He smoked two or three pipes and dragged the inkstand
with his pen, as if he were fishing for the
Midgard serpent, but he brought up nothing. He
was bound to say something about her personally,
sketch her character; he felt as if he were sitting in
judgment on her. Should he praise or revile her?
As it was a matter of complete indifference to him,
his mind was still not made up when it struck eleven.
He reviled her&mdash;and came to the end of the fourth
page, leaving twelve to be accounted for. He was
at his wits' end. He wanted to say something about
her rule, but as she had not ruled, there was nothing
to be said. He wrote about her Council&mdash;one page&mdash;leaving
eleven; he whitewashed Görtz&mdash;another&mdash;leaving
ten. He had not yet filled half the required
space. He hated the woman! More pipes! Fresh
steel nibs! He went back to remoter days, passing
them in review, and being now in a thoroughly bad
temper, he overthrew his old idol, Charles XII, and
hurled him in the dust; it was done in a few words,
and only added one more page to his pile. There
still remained nine. He anticipated events and
criticised Frederick I. Half a page! He glanced at
the paper with unhappy eyes; he glimpsed half-way
house, but could not reach it. He had written seven
and a half small pages; Ekelund had only managed
one and a half.</p>

<p>He flung the wood-block on the floor, kicked it
underneath his writing-table, crawled after it, dusted
it and put it in its former place. It was torture!
His soul was as dry as the block. He tried to work
himself up to views which he did not hold; he tried
to awaken some sort of emotion in his heart for the
dead queen, but her plain, dull features, cut into the
wood, made no more impression on him than he on
the block. He realized his incapacity and felt
despondent, degraded. And this was the career of<span class="pagenum">[67]</span>
his choice, the one he had preferred to all others.
With a strong appeal to his reason, he turned to the
guardian angel.</p>

<p>The brochure was originally written for a German
society, the "Nereus," and the argument was as
follows: Mr. and Mrs. Castle had emigrated to
America, where they acquired a large estate. To
make the story possible, they had sold their land,
and, very unpractically, invested the total amount
realized in costly furniture and objects of art. As
the story required that everything should be completely
lost and nothing whatever saved from the
shipwreck, they sent off the whole lot in advance
by the <i>Washington</i>, a first-class steamer, copper
bottomed, with watertight bulkheads, and insured
with the great German Marine Insurance Company
for £60,000. Mr. and Mrs. Castle and the children
followed on the <i>Bolivar</i>, the finest boat of the White
Star Line, insured with the great Marine Insurance
Company "Nereus" (Capital $10,000,000), and
safely arrived at Liverpool. They left Liverpool and
all went well until they came to Skagen Point.
During the whole voyage the weather had, of course,
been magnificent; the sky was clear and radiant,
but at the dangerous Skagen Point a storm overtook
them; the steamer was wrecked; the parents,
whose lives were insured, were drowned, thereby
guaranteeing to the children, who were saved, £1500.
The latter, rejoicing at their parents' foresight,
arrived at Hamburg in good spirits, eager to take
possession of the insurance money and the property
which they had inherited from their parents. Imagine
their consternation when they were told that the
<i>Washington</i> had been wrecked a fortnight before
their arrival on Dogger Bank; their whole fortune,
which had been left uninsured, was lost. All that
remained was the life insurance money. They
hurried to the Company's agents. A fresh disaster!
They were told that their parents had not paid the
last premium which&mdash;oh, fateful blow!&mdash;had been<span class="pagenum">[68]</span>
due on the day preceding their death. The distressed
children bitterly mourned their parents, who had
worked so hard for them. They embraced each other
with tears and made a solemn vow that henceforth
all their possessions should be insured, and that they
would never neglect paying their life insurance
premiums.</p>

<p>This story was to be localized, adapted to a Swedish
environment and made into a readable novelette;
and with this he was to make his début in the
literary world. The devil of pride whispered to him
not to be a blackguard and to leave the business alone,
but this voice was silenced by another, which came
from the region of his empty stomach, and was
accompanied by a gnawing, stinging sensation. He
drank a glass of water and smoked another pipe.
But his discomfort increased. His thoughts became
more gloomy; he found his room uncomfortable,
the morning dull and monotonous; he was tired and
despondent; everything seemed repulsive; his ideas
were spiritless and revolved round nothing but unpleasant
subjects; and still his discomfort grew.
He wondered whether he was hungry? It was one
o'clock. He never dined before three. He anxiously
examined his purse. Threepence halfpenny! For
the first time in his life he would have to go without
dinner! This was a trouble hitherto unknown to
him. But with threepence halfpenny there was no
necessity to starve. He could send for bread and
beer. No! That would not do; it was <i>infra dig.</i>
Go to a dairy? No! Borrow? Impossible! He
knew nobody who would lend. No sooner had he
realized this than hunger began to rage in him like
a wild beast let loose, biting him, tearing him and
chasing him round the room. He smoked pipe after
pipe to stupefy the monster; in vain.</p>

<p>A rolling of drums from the barracks yard told
him that the guardsmen were lining up with their
copper vessels to receive their dinner; every chimney
was smoking; the dinner bell went in the dockyard;<span class="pagenum">[69]</span>
a hissing sound came from his neighbour's, the
policemen's kitchen; the smell of roast meat
penetrated through the chinks of the door; he heard
the rattling of knives and plates in the adjacent room,
and the children saying grace. The paviours in the
street below were taking their after-dinner nap with
their heads on their empty food baskets. The whole
town was dining; everybody, except he. He raged
against God. But all at once a clear thought shot
through his brain. He seized Ulrica Eleonora and
the guardian angel, wrapped them in paper, wrote
Smith's name and address on the parcel, and handed
the messenger his threepence halfpenny. And with
a sigh of relief he threw himself on his sofa and
starved, with a heart bursting with pride.<span class="pagenum">[70]</span></p>


<p class="break"></p>

 <h2><a name="CHAPTER_VI" id="CHAPTER_VI"></a>CHAPTER VI</h2>

<h3>THE RED ROOM</h3>


<p>The same afternoon sun which had witnessed Arvid
Falk's defeat in his first battle with hunger shone
serenely into the cottage of the artists' colony, where
Sellén, in shirt sleeves, was standing before his easel
working at his picture which had to be in the
Exhibition on the following morning before ten,
finished, framed, and varnished. Olle Montanus sat
on the bed-sofa reading the wonderful book lent to
him by Ygberg for a day in exchange for his muffler;
betweenwhiles he cast a look of admiration at
Sellén's picture. He had great faith in Sellén's
talent. Lundell was calmly working at his "Descent
from the Cross"; he had already sent three pictures
to the Exhibition and, like many others, he was
awaiting their sale with a certain amount of excitement.</p>

<p>"It's fine, Sellén," said Olle, "you paint
divinely."</p>

<p>"May I look at your spinach?" asked Lundell,
who never admired anything, on principle.</p>

<p>The subject was simple and grand. The picture
represented a stretch of drifting sand on the coast
of Halland with the sea in the background; it was
full of the feeling of autumn; sunbeams were breaking
through riven clouds; the foreground was partly
drift sand and newly washed-up seaweed, dripping
wet and lit by the sun; in the middle distance lay
the sea, with huge crested waves&mdash;the greater part
in deep shadow; but in the background, on the
horizon, the sun was shining, opening up a per<span class="pagenum">[71]</span>spective
into infinity; the only figures were a flock
of birds.</p>

<p>No unperverted mind who had the courage to face
the mysterious wealth of solitude, had seen promising
harvests choked by the drifting sand, could fail to
understand the picture. It was painted with inspiration
and talent; the colouring was the result
of the prevailing mood, the mood was not engendered
by the colouring.</p>

<p>"You <i>must</i> have something in the foreground,"
persisted Lundell. "Take my advice."</p>

<p>"Rubbish!" replied Sellén.</p>

<p>"Do what I tell you, and don't be a fool, otherwise
you won't sell. Paint in a figure; a girl by
preference; I'll help you if you don't know how to
do it. Look here...."</p>

<p>"None of your tricks! What's the good of
petticoats in a high wind? You're mad on petticoats!"</p>

<p>"Very well, do as you like," replied Lundell, a
little hurt by the reference to one of his weakest
points. "But instead of those grey gulls you should
have painted storks. Nobody can tell what sort of
birds these are. Picture the red storks' legs against
the dark cloud! What a contrast!"</p>

<p>"You don't understand!"</p>

<p>Sellén was not clever in stating his motives, but
he was sure of his points and his sound instincts
led him safely past all errors.</p>

<p>"You won't sell," Lundell began again; his
friend's financial position worried him.</p>

<p>"Well, I shall live somehow in spite of it. Have
I ever sold anything? Am I the worse for it? Do
you think I don't know that I should sell if I painted
like everybody else? Do you think I can't paint
as badly as everybody else? I just don't want
to!"</p>

<p>"But you ought to think of paying your debts!
You owe Mr. Lund of the 'Sauce-Pan' several
hundred crowns." <span class="pagenum">[72]</span></p>

<p>"Well, that won't ruin him. Moreover I gave
him a picture worth twice that amount."</p>

<p>"You are the most selfish man I ever met! The
picture wasn't worth twenty crowns."</p>

<p>"I value it at five hundred, as prices go! But
unfortunately inclinations and tastes differ here
below. I find your 'Crucifixion' an execrable
performance, you find it beautiful. Nobody can
blame you for it. Tastes differ!"</p>

<p>"But you spoilt our credit at the 'Sauce-Pan.'
Mr. Lund refused to give me credit yesterday, and
I don't know how I'm to get a dinner to-day."</p>

<p>"What does it matter? Do without it! I
haven't had a dinner these last two years."</p>

<p>"You plundered Mr. Falk the other day, when he
fell into your clutches."</p>

<p>"That's true! He's a nice chap; moreover, he
has talent. There's much originality in his verses;
I have read some of them these last few evenings.
But I'm afraid he's not hard enough to get on in
this world. He's too sensitive, the rascal!"</p>

<p>"If he sees much of you, he'll get over that. It's
outrageous how you spoilt that young Rehnhjelm
in so short a time. I hear you are encouraging him
to go on the stage."</p>

<p>"Did he tell you that? The little devil! He'll
get on if he remains alive; but that's not so simple
when one has so little to eat! God's death! I've
no more paint! Can you spare any white? Merciful
Lord! All the tubes are empty! You must give
me some, Lundell!"</p>

<p>"I've no more than I want for myself&mdash;and even
if I had, I should take jolly good care not to give you
any."</p>

<p>"Stop talking nonsense! You know there's no
time to lose!"</p>

<p>"Seriously, I haven't got your colours. If you
weren't so wasteful your tubes would go further."</p>

<p>"I know that! Give me some money, then!"</p>

<p>"Money, indeed! That's no go!" <span class="pagenum">[73]</span></p>

<p>"Get up, Olle! You must go and pawn something."</p>

<p>At the word pawn Olle's face brightened; he saw
a prospect of food.</p>

<p>Sellén was searching the room.</p>

<p>"What's this? A pair of boots! We'll get
twopence halfpenny on them; they'd better be sold."</p>

<p>"They're Rehnhjelm's! You can't take them,"
objected Lundell, who had meant to put them on
in the afternoon when he was going up to town.
"Surely you aren't going to take liberties with other
people's property!"</p>

<p>"Why not? He'll be getting money for them.
What's in this parcel? A velvet waistcoat! A
beauty! I shall keep it for myself and then Olle
can pawn mine. Collars and cuffs? Oh! paper!
A pair of socks! Here, Olle, twopence halfpenny!
Wrap them in the waistcoat! You can sell the
empty bottles&mdash;I think the best thing would be to
sell everything."</p>

<p>"Do you mean to say you are going to sell other
people's belongings? Have you no sense of right
and wrong?" interrupted Lundell again, hoping to
gain possession of the parcel which had long tempted
him, by means of persuasion.</p>

<p>"He'll get paid for it later on! But it isn't enough
yet. We must take the sheets off the bed. Why
not? We don't want any sheets! Here, Olle,
cram them in!"</p>

<p>Olle very skilfully made a bag of one of the sheets
and stuffed everything into it, while Lundell went on
eagerly protesting.</p>

<p>When the parcel was made, Olle took it under his
arm, buttoned his ragged coat so as to hide the
absence of a waistcoat, and set out on his way to
the town.</p>

<p>"He looks like a thief," said Sellén, watching him
from the window with a sly smile. "I hope the
police won't interfere with him! Hurry up, Olle!"
he shouted after the retreating figure. "Buy six<span class="pagenum">[74]</span>
French rolls and two half-pints of beer if there's
anything over after you've bought the paint."</p>

<p>Olle turned round and waved his hat with as
much assurance as if he had the feast already safely
in his pockets.</p>

<p>Lundell and Sellén were alone. Sellén was admiring
his new velvet waistcoat for which Lundell had nursed
a secret passion for a long time. He scraped his
palette and cast envious glances at the lost glory.
But it was something else he was trying to speak
of; something else, which was very difficult to
mention.</p>

<p>"I wish you'd look at my picture," he said at last.
"What do you think of it, seriously?"</p>

<p>"Don't draw and slave at it so much! Paint!
Where does the light come from? From the clothes,
from the flesh! It's crazy! What do these people
breathe? Colour! Turpentine! I see no air!"</p>

<p>"Well," said Lundell, "tastes differ, as you said
just now. What do you think of the composition?"</p>

<p>"Too many people!"</p>

<p>"You're awful! I want more, not fewer."</p>

<p>"Let me see! There's one great mistake in it."</p>

<p>Sellén shot a long glance at the picture, a glance
peculiar to the inhabitants of sea-coasts and plains.</p>

<p>"Yes, you're right," agreed Lundell. "You can
see it then?"</p>

<p>"There are only men in your picture. It's somewhat
monotonous."</p>

<p>"That's it! But fancy, that you should see
that!"</p>

<p>"You want a woman then?"</p>

<p>Lundell looked at him, wondering whether he was
joking, but was unable to settle the point, for Sellén
was whistling.</p>

<p>"Yes, I want a female figure," he replied at last.</p>

<p>There was silence, and gradually the silence
became uncomfortable: two very old acquaintances
in a <i>tête-à-tête</i> conversation.</p>

<p>"I wish I knew where to get a model from! I<span class="pagenum">[75]</span>
don't want the Academy models, the whole world
knows them, and, besides, the subject is a religious
one."</p>

<p>"You want something better? I understand!
If it were not for the nude, I might perhaps...."</p>

<p>"It isn't for the nude! Are you mad? Among
all those men ... besides, it's a religious subject."</p>

<p>"Yes, yes, we know all that. She must be dressed
in something Oriental, and bend down as if she were
picking up something, show her shoulders, her neck,
and the first vertebra, I understand. Religious like
the Magdalene! Bird's-eye view!"</p>

<p>"You scoff and jeer at everything!"</p>

<p>"Let's keep to the point! You shall have your
model, for it's impossible to paint without one.
You, yourself, don't know one. Very well! Your
religious principles don't allow you to look for one;
therefore Rehnhjelm and I, the two black sheep, will
find you one."</p>

<p>"But it must be a respectable girl, don't forget
that."</p>

<p>"Of course! We will see what we can do, the day
after to-morrow, when we shall be in funds."</p>

<p>And they went on painting, quietly, diligently,
until four&mdash;until five. Every now and then their
anxious glances swept the road. Sellén was the
first to break the uneasy silence.</p>

<p>"Olle is a long time! Something must have
happened to him," he said.</p>

<p>"Yes, something must be up. But why do you
always send the poor devil? Why can't you run
your own errands?"</p>

<p>"He's nothing else to do, and he likes going."</p>

<p>"How d'you know? And besides, let me tell
you, nobody can say how Olle's going to turn out.
He has great schemes, and he may be on his feet
any day; then it will be a good thing to have him
for a friend."</p>

<p>"You don't say so! What great work is he going
to accomplish? I can quite believe that Olle will<span class="pagenum">[76]</span>
become a great man, although not a great sculptor.
But where the devil is he? Do you think he's
spending the money?"</p>

<p>"Possibly, possibly! He's had nothing for a long
time and perhaps the temptation was too strong,"
answered Lundell, tightening his belt by two holes,
and wondering what he would do in Olle's place.</p>

<p>"Well, he's only human, and charity begins at
home," said Sellén, who knew perfectly well what
he would have done under the circumstances. "But
I can't wait any longer. I must have paint, even if
I have to steal it. I'll go and see Falk."</p>

<p>"Are you going to squeeze more out of that poor
chap? You robbed him yesterday for your frame.
And it wasn't a small sum you borrowed."</p>

<p>"My dear fellow! I am compelled to cast all
feelings of shame to the winds; there's no help for
it. One has to put up with a good deal. However,
Falk is a great-hearted fellow who understands that
a man may suddenly find himself in Queer Street.
Anyhow, I'm going. If Olle returns in the meantime,
tell him he's a blockhead. So long! Come
to the Red Room and we'll see whether our master
will be graciously pleased to give us something to eat
before the sun sets. Lock the door, when you leave,
and push the key underneath the mat. By-by!"</p>

<p>He went, and before long he stood before Falk's
door in Count Magni Street. He knocked, but
received no reply. He opened the door and went in.
Falk, who had probably had uneasy dreams, awakened
from his sleep, jumped up and stared at Sellén
without recognizing him.</p>

<p>"Good evening, old chap," said Sellén.</p>

<p>"Oh! It's you. I must have had a strange
dream. Good evening! Sit down and smoke a
pipe! Is it evening already?"</p>

<p>Sellén thought he knew the symptoms, but he
pretended to notice nothing.</p>

<p>"You didn't go to the 'Brass Button' to-day?"
he remarked.<span class="pagenum">[77]</span></p>

<p>"No," replied Falk, confused; "I wasn't there,
I was at Iduna."</p>

<p>He really did not know whether he had dreamt it
or whether he had actually been there; but he was
glad that he had said it, for he was ashamed of his
position.</p>

<p>"Perfectly right, old chap," commented Sellén;
"the cooking at the 'Brass Button' is beneath
criticism."</p>

<p>"It is, indeed," agreed Falk; "the soup's damned
bad."</p>

<p>"And the old head-waiter is always on the spot,
counting the rolls and butter, the rascal!"</p>

<p>The words "rolls and butter" awakened Falk to
consciousness; he did not feel hungry, only a little
shaky and faint. But he did not like the subject of
conversation and changed it.</p>

<p>"Well, will your picture be ready for to-morrow?"
he asked.</p>

<p>"No, unfortunately, it won't."</p>

<p>"What's the matter now?"</p>

<p>"I can't possibly finish it."</p>

<p>"You can't? Why aren't you at home working?"</p>

<p>"The old, old story, my dear fellow! I have no
paint! No paint!"</p>

<p>"But there's a remedy for that! Or haven't you
any money?"</p>

<p>"If I had I should be all right."</p>

<p>"And I haven't any either! What's to be done?"</p>

<p>Sellén dropped his eyes until his glance reached the
height of Falk's waistcoat pocket, into which a
heavy gold chain was creeping; not that Sellén
believed it to be gold, good, stamped gold. He
could not have understood the recklessness of
carrying so much money outside one's waistcoat.
But his thoughts were following a definite course,
and he continued:</p>

<p>"If at least I had something to pawn! But we
carelessly pledged our winter overcoats on the first
sunny day in April." <span class="pagenum">[78]</span></p>

<p>Falk blushed. He had never done such a thing.</p>

<p>"Do you pawn your winter overcoats?" he asked.
"Do you get anything on them?"</p>

<p>"One gets something on everything&mdash;on everything,"
said Sellén, laying stress on <i>everything</i>; "the
only thing needful is to have something."</p>

<p>To Falk the room seemed to be turning round. He
had to sit down. Then he pulled out his gold watch.</p>

<p>"How much, do you think, should I get on this
watch and chain?"</p>

<p>Sellén seized the future pledges and looked at them
with the eye of a connoisseur.</p>

<p>"Is it gold?" he asked faintly.</p>

<p>"It is gold."</p>

<p>"Stamped?"</p>

<p>"Stamped."</p>

<p>"The chain, too?"</p>

<p>"The chain, too."</p>

<p>"A hundred crowns," declared Sellén, shaking his
hand so that the gold chain rattled. "But it's a
pity! You shouldn't pawn your things for my
sake."</p>

<p>"Then for my own," said Falk, anxious to avoid
the semblance of an unselfishness which he did not
feel. "I want money, too. If you'll turn them
into cash, you'll do me a service."</p>

<p>"All right then," said Sellén, resolved not to
embarrass his friend by asking indelicate questions.
"I'll pawn them! Pull yourself together, old chap!
Life is hard at times, I don't deny it; but we go
through with it."</p>

<p>He patted Falk's shoulder with a cordiality which
did not often pierce the scorn with which he had
enveloped himself.</p>

<p>They went out together.</p>

<p>By the time they had concluded the business it
was seven o'clock. They bought the paint and
repaired to the Red Room.<br /><br /></p>

<p>Berns' "Salon" had just begun to play its<span class="pagenum">[79]</span>
civilizing part in the life of Stockholm by putting
an end to the unhealthy <i>café-chantants</i> life which
had flourished&mdash;or raged&mdash;in the sixties, and from
the capital had spread over the whole country. Here,
every evening after seven, crowds of young people
met who lived in that abnormal transition stage
which begins on leaving the parental roof and ends
with the foundation of a new home and family;
here were numbers of young men who had escaped
from the solitude of their room or attic to find light
and warmth and a fellow-creature to talk to. The
proprietor had made more than one attempt to
amuse his patrons by pantomimic, gymnastic, ballet,
and other performances; but he had been plainly
shown that his guests were not in search of amusement,
but in quest of peace; what was wanted was
a consulting-room, where one was likely every
moment to chance on a friend. The band was
tolerated because it did not stop conversation, but
rather stimulated it, and gradually it became as
much a component of the Stockholm evening diet,
as punch and tobacco.</p>

<p>In this way Berns' Salon became the bachelors'
club of all Stockholm. Every circle had its special
corner; the colonists of Lill-Jans had usurped the
inner chess room, usually called the Red Room on
account of its red furniture and for the sake of brevity.
It was a safe meeting-ground even if during the whole
day the members had been scattered like chaff.
When times were hard and funds had to be raised at
any cost, regular raids were made from this spot
round the room. A chain was formed: two members
skirmished in the galleries, and two others attacked
the room lengthways. One might have said they
dredged the room with a ground-net, and they rarely
dredged in vain, for there was a constant flow of new
arrivals during the evening.</p>

<p>To-night, however, these efforts were not required;
Sellén, calmly and proudly, sat down on the red
sofa in the background. After having acted a little<span class="pagenum">[80]</span>
farce on the subject of what they were going to drink,
they came to the conclusion that they must have something
to eat first. They were starting the "sexa," and
Falk was beginning to feel a return of his strength,
when a long shadow fell across their table. Before them
stood Ygberg, as pale and emaciated as ever. Sellén,
who was in funds to-night, and under those circumstances
invariably courteous and kind-hearted, pressed
him to have dinner with them, and Falk seconded
the invitation. Ygberg hesitated while examining
the contents of the dishes and calculating whether
his hunger would be satisfied or only half-satisfied.</p>

<p>"You wield a stinging pen, Mr. Falk," he said, in
order to deflect the attention from the raids which
his fork was making on the tray.</p>

<p>"How? What do you mean?" asked Falk
flushing; he did not know that anybody had made
the acquaintance of his pen.</p>

<p>"The article has created a sensation."</p>

<p>"What article? I don't understand."</p>

<p>"The correspondence in the <i>People's Flag</i> on the
Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries."</p>

<p>"I didn't write it."</p>

<p>"But the Board is convinced that you did. I just
met a member who's a friend of mine; he mentioned
you as the author; I understood that the resentment
was fierce."</p>

<p>"Indeed?"</p>

<p>Falk felt that he was half to blame for it; he
realized now what the notes were which Struve had
been making on that evening on Moses Height. But
Struve had merely reported what he, Falk, had said.
He was responsible for his statements and must
stand by them even at the risk of being considered
a scandal-monger. Retreat was impossible; he
realized that he must go on.</p>

<p>"Very well," he said, "I am the instigator of the
article. But let us talk of something else! What
do you think of Ulrica Eleonora? Isn't she an
interesting character? Or what is your opinion of<span class="pagenum">[81]</span>
the Maritime Insurance Company Triton? Or
Haquin Spegel?"</p>

<p>"Ulrica Eleonora is the most interesting character
in the whole history of Sweden," answered Ygberg
gravely; "I've just had an order to write an essay
on her."</p>

<p>"From Smith?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"Yes; but how do you know?"</p>

<p>"I've returned the block this afternoon."</p>

<p>"It's wrong to refuse work. You'll repent it!
Believe me."</p>

<p>A hectic flush crimsoned Falk's cheeks; he spoke
feverishly. Sellén sat quietly on the sofa, smoking.
He paid more attention to the band than to the
conversation, which did not interest him because he
did not understand it. From his sofa corner he
could see through the two open doors leading to the
south gallery, and catch a glimpse of the north
gallery. In spite of the dense cloud of smoke which
hung above the pit between the two galleries, he
could distinguish the faces on the other side.
Suddenly his attention was caught by something in
the distance. He clutched Falk's arm.</p>

<p>"The sly-boots! Look behind the left curtain!"</p>

<p>"Lundell!"</p>

<p>"Just so! He's looking for a Magdalene! See!
He's talking to her now! What a beautiful girl!"</p>

<p>Falk blushed, a fact which did not escape Sellén.</p>

<p>"Does he come here for his models?" he asked
surprised.</p>

<p>"Well, where else should he go to? He can't find
them in the dark."</p>

<p>A moment afterwards Lundell joined them;
Sellén greeted him with a patronizing nod, the
significance of which did not seem to be lost on the
newcomer. He bowed to Falk with more than his
usual politeness, and expressed his astonishment at
Ygberg's presence in disparaging words. Ygberg,
carefully observing him, seized the opportunity to
ask him what he would like to eat. Lundell opened<span class="pagenum">[82]</span>
his eyes; he seemed to have fallen among magnates.
He felt happy; a gentle, philanthropic mood took
possession of him, and after ordering a hot supper,
he felt constrained to give expression to his emotion.
It was obvious that he wanted to say something to
Falk, but it was difficult to find an opening. The
band was playing "Hear us, Sweden!" and a moment
afterwards "A Stronghold is our God."</p>

<p>Falk called for more drink.</p>

<p>"I wonder whether you admire this fine old hymn
as much as I do, Mr. Falk?" began Lundell.</p>

<p>Falk, who was not conscious of admiring any one
hymn more than another, asked him to have some
punch. Lundell had misgivings; he did not know
whether he could venture. He thought he had better
have some more supper first; he was not strong
enough to drink. He tried to prove it, after his
third liqueur, by a short but violent attack of
coughing.</p>

<p>"The <i>Torch of Reconciliation</i> is a splendid name,"
he said presently; "it proves at the same time
the deep, religious need of atonement, and the
light which came into the world when the miracle
happened which has always given offence to the
proud in spirit."</p>

<p>He swallowed a meat ball while carefully studying
the effect of his remark&mdash;and felt anything but
flattered when he saw three blank faces staring at
him, expressing nothing but consternation.</p>

<p>"Spegel is a great name, and his words are not like
the words of the Pharisees. We all know that he
wrote the magnificent psalm, 'The wailing cries
are silent,' a psalm which has never been equalled.
Your health, Mr. Falk! I am glad to hear that you
are identifying yourself with the work of such a
man."</p>

<p>Lundell discovered that his glass was empty.</p>

<p>"I think I must have another half-pint!"</p>

<p>Two thoughts were humming in Falk's brain:
"The fellow is drinking neat brandy" and "How<span class="pagenum">[83]</span>
did he get to know about Spegel?" A suspicion
illuminated his mind like a flash of lightning, but
he pretended to know nothing, and merely said:
"Your health, Mr. Lundell!"</p>

<p>The unpleasant explanation which seemed bound
to follow was avoided by the sudden entrance of
Olle. It was Olle, but more rugged than before,
dirtier than before and, to judge from his appearance,
lamer than before. His hips stood out beneath
his coat like bowsprits; a single button kept his
coat together close above his first rib. But he was
in good spirits and laughed on seeing so much food
and drink on the table. To Sellén's horror he began
to report on the success of his mission, all the time
divesting himself of his acquisitions. He had really
been arrested by the police.</p>

<p>"Here are the tickets!"</p>

<p>He handed Sellén two green pawn-tickets across
the table, which Sellén instantly converted into a
paper pellet.</p>

<p>He had been taken to the police station. He
pointed to his coat, the collar of which was missing.
There he was asked for his name. His name was,
of course, assumed! There existed no such name
as Montanus! His native place? Västmanland!
Again a false statement! The inspector was a native
of that province and knew his countrymen. His age?
Twenty-eight years! That was a lie; he must be
at least forty. His domicile? Lill-Jans! Another
lie; nobody but a gardener lived there. His profession?
Artist! That also was a lie: for he looked
like a dock labourer.</p>

<p>"Here's your paint, four tubes! Better look at
them carefully!"</p>

<p>His parcel had been opened and, in the process,
one of the sheets had been torn.</p>

<p>"Therefore I only got one and twopence halfpenny
for both. You'll see that I'm right if you'll look at
the ticket."</p>

<p>The next question was where he had stolen the<span class="pagenum">[84]</span>
things? Olle had replied that he had not stolen
them; then the inspector drew his attention to the
fact that he had not been asked <i>whether</i> he had stolen
them, but <i>where</i> he had stolen them? Where?
where? where?</p>

<p>"Here's your change, twopence halfpenny; I've
kept nothing back."</p>

<p>Then the evidence was taken down and the stolen
goods&mdash;which had been sealed with three seals&mdash;were
described. In vain had Olle protested, in vain
had he appealed to their sense of justice and humanity;
the only result of his protestations was a suggestion
made by the constable to place on record that the
prisoner&mdash;he was already regarded in the light of a
prisoner&mdash;was heavily intoxicated; the suggestion
was acted upon, but the word heavily was omitted.
After the inspector had repeatedly urged the constable
to try and remember whether the prisoner had offered
resistance at his arrest, and the constable had declared
that he could not take his oath on it&mdash;it would have
been a very serious matter for the prisoner looked a
desperate character&mdash;but it had <i>appeared</i> to him that
he had tried to resist by taking refuge in a doorway
the latter statement was placed on record.</p>

<p>Then a report was drawn up, and Olle was ordered
to sign it. It ran as follows:</p>

<p>A male individual of sinister and forbidding
appearance was found slinking along the row of houses
in Northland Street, carrying a suspicious-looking
parcel in his hand. On his arrest he was dressed in
a green frock-coat&mdash;he wore no waistcoat&mdash;blue serge
trousers, a shirt with the initials P.L. (which clearly
proves that either the shirt was stolen or that he
had given a wrong name), woollen stockings with
grey edges, and a felt hat with a cock's feather.
Prisoner gave the assumed name of Olle Montanus,
falsely deposed that his people were peasants in
Västmanland and that he was an artist, domiciled
at Lill-Jans, obviously an invention. On being
arrested he tried to offer resistance by taking refuge<span class="pagenum">[85]</span>
in a doorway. Then followed a minute description
of the contents of the parcel.</p>

<p>As Olle refused to admit the correctness of this
report, a telegram was sent to the prison, and a
conveyance appeared to fetch Olle, the bundle, and
a constable.</p>

<p>As they were turning into Mint Street, Olle caught
sight of Per Illson, a member of Parliament and a
countryman of his. He called to him, and Per
Illson proved that the report was wrong. Olle was
released and his bundle was restored to him. And
now he had come to join them and&mdash;&mdash;</p>

<p>"Here are your French rolls! There are only five
of them, for I've eaten one. And here's the beer!"</p>

<p>He produced five French rolls from his coat pockets,
laid them on the table, and placed two bottles of
beer, which he pulled out of his trousers pockets, by
the side of them, after which his figure resumed its
usual disproportions.</p>

<p>"Falk, old chap, you must excuse Olle; he's not
used to smart society. Put the French rolls back
into your pockets, Olle! What will you be up to
next?" said Sellén disapprovingly.</p>

<p>Olle obeyed.</p>

<p>Lundell refused to have the tray taken away,
although he had cleared the dishes so thoroughly
that it would have been impossible to say what they
had contained; every now and then he seized the
brandy bottle, absent-mindedly, and poured himself
out half a glass. Occasionally he stood up or turned
round in his chair to "see what the band was playing."
On those occasions Sellén kept a close eye on him.</p>

<p>At last Rehnhjelm arrived. He had obviously
been drinking; he sat down silently, his eyes seeking
an object on which they could rest while he listened
to Lundell's exhortations. Finally his weary eyes
fell on Sellén and remained riveted on the velvet
waistcoat, which gave him plenty of food for thought
for the remainder of the evening. His face brightened
momentarily as if he had met an old friend; but the<span class="pagenum">[86]</span>
light on it went out as Sellén buttoned up his coat
"because there was a draught."</p>

<p>Ygberg took care that Olle had some supper, and
never tired of urging him to help himself and to fill
his glass.</p>

<p>As the evening advanced music and conversation
grew more and more lively.</p>

<p>This state of semi-stupor had a great charm for
Falk; it was warm, light, and noisy here; he was
in the company of men whose lives he had prolonged
for a few more hours and who were therefore gay and
lively, as flies revived by the rays of the sun. He
felt that he was one of them, for he knew that in
their inner consciousness they were unhappy; they
were unassuming; they understood him, and they
talked like human beings and not like books; even
their coarseness was not unattractive; there was so
much naturalness in it, so much innocence; even
Lundell's hypocrisy did not repulse him; it was so
naïve and sat on him so loosely, that it could have
been cast off at any moment.</p>

<p>And the evening passed away and the day was
over which had pushed Falk irrevocably on to the
thorny path of the writer.<span class="pagenum">[87]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_VII" id="CHAPTER_VII"></a>CHAPTER VII</h2>

<h3>THE IMITATION OF CHRIST</h3>


<p>On the following morning Falk was awakened by a
maid servant who brought him a letter. He opened
it and read:</p>

<p style="text-align: center">
Timothy x. 27, 28, 29.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />
First Corinth. vi. 3, 4, 5.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">Dear Brother</span>,<br />


The grace and peace of our Lord J. C., the
love of the father and the fellowship of the H. G.,
etc., Amen.</p>

<p>I read last night in the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> that you are
going to edit the <i>Torch of Reconciliation</i>. Meet me
in my office to-morrow morning.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
Your saved brother,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />

<span class="smcap">Nathanael Skore</span>.<br /><br />
</div>



<p>Now he partially understood Lundell's riddle.
He did not know Skore, the great champion of the
Lord, personally; he knew nothing of the <i>Torch
of Reconciliation</i>, but he was curious and decided to
obey the insolent request.</p>

<p>At nine o'clock he was in Government Street,
looking at the imposing four-storied house, the front
of which, from cellar to roof, was covered by sign-boards:
"Christian Printing office, <i>Peace</i>, Ltd.,
second floor. Editorial office, <i>The Inheritance of
the Children of God</i>, half-landing floor. Publishing
office, <i>The Last Judgment</i>, first floor. Publishing
office, <i>The Trump of Peace</i>, second floor. Editorial
office of the children's paper, <i>Feed My Lambs</i>, first<span class="pagenum">[88]</span>
floor. Offices of the Christian Prayer House Society,
Ltd., <i>The Seat of Mercy</i>. Loans granted against
first securities, third floor. <i>Come to Jesus</i>, third
floor. Employment found for respectable salesmen
who can offer security. Foreign Missions Society,
Ltd., <i>Eagle</i>, distribution of the profits of the year
1867 in coupons, second floor. Offices of the
Christian Mission Steamer <i>Zululu</i>, second floor.
The steamer will leave, D.V., on the 28th. Goods
received against bill of lading and certificate at the
shipping offices close to the landing-bridge where the
steamer is loading. Needlework society 'Ant Heap'
receives gifts, first floor. Clergymen's bands washed
and ironed by the porter. Wafers at 1<i>s.</i> 6<i>d.</i> a pound
obtainable from the porter. Black dress-coats for
confirmation candidates let out. Unfermented wine
(Mat. xix. 32) at 9&frac12;<i>d.</i> per quart; apply to the
porter. (Bring your own jug.)"</p>

<p>On the ground floor, to the left of the archway,
was a Christian bookshop. Falk stopped for a few
moments and read the titles of the books exhibited
in the window. It was the usual thing. Indiscreet
questions, impudent charges, offensive familiarities.
But his attention was mainly attracted to a number
of illustrated magazines with large English woodcuts,
displayed in the window in order to attract the passers-by.
More especially the children's papers had an
interesting table of contents, and the young man in
the shop could have told anyone who cared to know
that old men and women would pass hours before
this window, lost in contemplation of the illustrations,
which appeared to move their pious hearts
and awaken memories of their vanished&mdash;and perhaps
wasted&mdash;youth.</p>

<p>He climbed the broad staircase between Pompeian
frescoes reminiscent of the path which does not lead
to salvation, and came to a large room furnished with
desks like a bank, but so far unoccupied by cashiers
and book-keepers. In the centre of the room stood
a writing-table, of the size of an altar, resembling an<span class="pagenum">[89]</span>
organ with many stops; there was a complete key-board
with buttons and semaphores with trumpet-like
speaking-tubes, connected with all parts of the
building. A big man in riding-boots was standing
at the writing-desk. He wore a cassock fastened with
one button at the neck which gave it a military
appearance; the coat was surmounted by a white
band and the mask of a sea captain, for the real face
had long ago been mislaid in one of the desks or
boxes. The big man was slapping the tops of his
boots with his horsewhip, the handle of which was
in the form of a symbolical hoof, and sedulously
smoking and chewing a strong regalia, probably to
keep his jaws in trim. Falk looked at the big man
in astonishment.</p>

<p>This, then, was the last fashion in clergymen, for
in men, too, there is a fashion. This was the great
promulgator, who had succeeded in making it fashionable
to be sinful, to thirst for mercy, to be poor and
wretched, in fact, to be a worthless specimen of
humanity in every possible way. This was the man
who had brought salvation in vogue! He had
discovered a gospel for smart society. The divine
ordinance of grace had become a sport! There were
competitions in viciousness in which the prize was
given to the sinner. Paper chases were arranged to
catch poor souls for the purpose of saving them;
but also, let us confess it, battues for subjects on
whom to demonstrate one's conversion in a practical
manner, by venting on them the most cruel charity.</p>

<p>"Oh, it's you, Mr. Falk," said the mask.
"Welcome, dear friend! Perhaps you would like to
see something of my work? Pardon me, I hope you
are saved? Yes, this is the office of the printing
works. Excuse me a second."</p>

<p>He stepped up to the organ and pulled out several
stops. The answer was a long whistle.</p>

<p>"Just have a look round."</p>

<p>He put his mouth to one of the trumpets and
shouted: "The seventh trumpet and the eighth woe!<span class="pagenum">[90]</span>
Composition Mediæval 8, titles Gothic, names spaced
out."</p>

<p>A voice answered through the same trumpet:
"No more manuscript." The mask sat down at the
organ, and took a pen and a sheet of foolscap. The
pen raced over the paper while he talked, cigar in
mouth.</p>

<p>"This activity&mdash;is so extensive&mdash;that it would
soon&mdash;be beyond my strength&mdash;and my health&mdash;would
be worse&mdash;than it is&mdash;if I did&mdash;not look after
it&mdash;so well."</p>

<p>He jumped up, pulled out another stop and
shouted into another trumpet: "Proofs of 'Have
you paid your Debt?'" Then he continued writing
and talking.</p>

<p>"You wonder&mdash;why&mdash;I&mdash;wear riding-boots. It's
first&mdash;because&mdash;I take riding exercises&mdash;for the sake
of&mdash;my health...."</p>

<p>A boy appeared with proofs. The mask handed
them to Falk. "Please read that," he said, speaking
through his nose, because his mouth was busy, while
his eyes shouted to the boy: Wait!</p>

<p>"... secondly&mdash;(a movement of the ears plainly
conveyed to Falk that he had not lost the thread),
because&mdash;I am of opinion&mdash;that a spiritually minded
man should not&mdash;be conspicuous&mdash;by his appearance&mdash;for
this would be&mdash;spiritual pride&mdash;and a challenge&mdash;to
the scoffers."</p>

<p>A book-keeper entered. The mask acknowledged
his salutation by a wrinkling of his forehead, the
only part of his face which was unoccupied.</p>

<p>For want of something else to do, Falk took the
proofs and began to read them. The cigar continued
talking:</p>

<p>"Everybody&mdash;wears&mdash;riding-boots. I won't&mdash;be
conspicuous&mdash;by my&mdash;appearance. I wear&mdash;riding-boots&mdash;because&mdash;I'm
no humbug."</p>

<p>He handed the manuscript to the boy and shouted&mdash;with
his lips: "Four sticks&mdash;Seventh trumpet for
Nyström!"&mdash;and then to Falk:<span class="pagenum">[91]</span></p>

<p>"I shall be disengaged in five minutes. Will you
come with me to the warehouse?"</p>

<p>And to the book-keeper:</p>

<p>"Zululu is charging?"</p>

<p>"Brandy," answered the book-keeper in a rusty
voice.</p>

<p>"Everything all right?"</p>

<p>"Everything all right."</p>

<p>"In God's name, then! Come along Mr. Falk."</p>

<p>They entered a room the walls of which were lined
with shelves, filled with piles of books. The mask
touched them with his horsewhip and said proudly:</p>

<p>"I've written those! What do you think of that?
Isn't it a lot? You, too, write&mdash;a little. If you
stick to it, you might write as much."</p>

<p>He bit and tore at his cigar and spat out the tiny
flakes which filled the air like flies and settled on the
backs of the books. His face wore a look of contempt.</p>

<p>"The <i>Torch of Reconciliation</i>! Hm! I think it's
a stupid name! Don't you rather agree with me?
What made you think of it?"</p>

<p>For the first time Falk had a chance of getting in a
word, for like all great men, the mask answered his
own questions. His reply was in the negative but
he got no further; the mask again usurped the
conversation.</p>

<p>"I think it's a very stupid name. And do you
really believe that it will draw?"</p>

<p>"I know nothing whatever about the matter; I
don't know what you are talking about."</p>

<p>"You don't know?"</p>

<p>He took up a paper and pointed to a paragraph.</p>

<p>Falk, very much taken aback, read the following
advertisement:</p>

<p>"Notice to subscribers: The <i>Torch of Reconciliation</i>.
Magazine for Christian readers, about to
appear under the editorship of Arvid Falk whose
work has been awarded a prize by the Academy of
Sciences. The first number will contain 'God's<span class="pagenum">[92]</span>
Creation,' by Hokan Spegel, a poem of an admittedly
religious and profoundly Christian spirit."</p>

<p>Falk had forgotten Spegel and his agreement; he
stood speechless.</p>

<p>"How large is the edition going to be? What?
Two thousand, I suppose. Too small! No good!
My <i>Last Judgment</i> was ten thousand, and yet I didn't
make more than&mdash;what shall I say?&mdash;fifteen net."</p>

<p>"Fifteen?"</p>

<p>"Thousand, young man!"</p>

<p>The mask seemed to have forgotten his part and
reverted to old habits.</p>

<p>"You know," he continued, "that I'm a popular
preacher; I may say that without boasting, for all
the world knows it. You know, that I'm very
popular; I can't help that&mdash;it is so! I should be a
hypocrite if I pretended not to know what all the
world knows! Well, I'll give you a helping hand to
begin with. Look at this bag here! If I say that
it contains letters from persons&mdash;ladies&mdash;don't upset
yourself, I'm a married man&mdash;begging for my
portrait, I have not said too much."</p>

<p>As a matter of fact it was nothing but an ordinary
bag which he touched with his whip.</p>

<p>"To save them and me a great deal of trouble,
and at the same time for the sake of doing a fellow-man
a kindness, I have decided to permit you to
write my biography; then you can safely issue ten
thousand copies of your first number and pocket a
clear thousand."</p>

<p>"But, my dear pastor&mdash;he had it on the tip of his
tongue to say captain&mdash;I know nothing at all about
this matter."</p>

<p>"Never mind! Never mind! The publisher has
himself written to me and asked me for my portrait.
And you are to write my biography! To facilitate
your work, I asked a friend to write down the principal
points. You have only to write an introduction,
brief and eloquent&mdash;a few sticks at the most. That's
all." <span class="pagenum">[93]</span></p>

<p>So much foresight depressed Falk; he was surprised
to find the portrait so unlike the original, and
the friend's handwriting so much like that of the
mask.</p>

<p>The latter, who had given him portrait and
manuscript, now held out his hand expecting to be
thanked.</p>

<p>"My regards to&mdash;the publisher."</p>

<p>He had so nearly said Smith, that a slight blush
appeared between his whiskers.</p>

<p>"But you don't know my views yet," protested
Falk.</p>

<p>"Views? Have I asked what your views are?
I never ask anybody about his views. God forbid!
I? Never!"</p>

<p>Once more he touched the backs of his publications
with his whip, opened the door, let the biographer
out and returned to his service at the altar.</p>

<p>Falk, as usual, could not think of a suitable answer
until it was too late; when he thought of one, he
was already in the street. A cellar window which
happened to stand wide open (and was not covered
with advertisements) received biography and portrait
into safe keeping.</p>

<p>Then Falk went to the nearest newspaper office,
handed in a protest against the <i>Torch of Reconciliation</i>,
and resigned himself to starve.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_94" id="Page_94">[94]</a></span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_VIII" id="CHAPTER_VIII"></a>CHAPTER VIII</h2>

<h3>POOR MOTHER COUNTRY</h3>


<p>The clock on the Riddarholms Church struck ten
as Falk arrived, a few days later, at the Parliamentary
buildings to assist the representative of the Red Cap
in reporting the proceedings of the Second Chamber.</p>

<p>He hastened his footsteps, convinced that here,
where the pay was good, strict punctuality would
be looked upon as a matter of course. He climbed
the Committee stairs and was shown to the reporters'
gallery on the left. A feeling of awe overcame him
as he walked across the few boards, hung up under the
roof like a pigeon house, where the men of "free
speech listen to the discussion of the country's most
sacred interests by the country's most worthy
representatives."</p>

<p>It was a new sensation to Falk; but he was far
from being impressed as he looked down from his
scaffolding into the empty hall which resembled a
Lancastrian school. It was five minutes past ten, but
with the exception of himself, not a soul was present.
All of a sudden the silence was broken by a scraping
noise. A rat! he thought, but almost immediately
he discovered, on the opposite gallery, across the
huge, empty hall, a short, abject figure sharpening
a pencil on the rail. He watched the chips fluttering
down and settling on the tables below.</p>

<p>His eyes scanned the empty walls without finding
a resting-place, until finally they fell on the old
clock, dating from the time of Napoleon I, with its
imperial newly lit emblems, symbolical of the old
story, and its hands, now pointing to ten minutes<span class="pagenum">[95]</span>
past ten, symbolical in the spirit of irony&mdash;of something
else. At the same moment the doors in the
background opened and a man entered. He was old;
his shoulders stooped under the burden of public
offices; his back had shrunk under the weight of
communal commissions; the long continuance in
damp offices, committee-rooms and safe deposits
had warped his neck; there was a suggestion of the
pensioner in his calm footsteps, as he walked up the
cocoa-nut matting towards the chair. When he
had reached the middle of the long passage and had
come into line with the imperial clock, he stopped;
he seemed accustomed to stopping half-way and
looking round and backwards; but now he stopped
to compare his watch with the clock; he shook his
old, worn out head with a look of discontent: "Fast!
Fast!" he murmured. His features expressed a
supernatural calm and the assurance that his watch
could not be slow. He continued his way with
the same deliberate footsteps; he might be walking
towards the goal of his life; and it was very much
a question whether he had not attained it when he
arrived at the venerable chair on the platform.
When he was standing close by it he pulled out his
handkerchief and blew his nose; his eyes roamed
over the brilliant audience of chairs and tables,
announcing an important event: "Gentlemen, I
have blown my nose." Then he sat down and sank
into a presidential calm which might have been sleep,
if it had not been waking; and, alone in the large
room, as he imagined, alone with his God, he prepared
to summon strength for the business of the day,
when a loud scraping on the left, high up, underneath
the roof, pierced the stillness; he started and
turned his head to kill with a three-quarter look the
rat which dared to gnaw in his presence. Falk
who had omitted to take into account the resonant
capacity of the pigeon house, received the deadly
thrust of the murderous glance; but the glance
softened as it slid down from the eaves-mouldings,<span class="pagenum">[96]</span>
whispering&mdash;"Only a reporter; I was afraid it might
be a rat." And deep regret stole over the murderer,
contrition at the sin committed by his eye; he
buried his face in his hands and&mdash;wept? Oh, no!
he rubbed off the spot which the appearance of a
repulsive object had thrown on his retina.</p>

<p>Presently the doors were flung wide open; the
delegates were beginning to arrive, while the hands
on the clock crept forward&mdash;forward. The president
rewarded the good with friendly nods and pressures
of the hand, and punished the evil-doers by turning
away his head; he was bound to be just as the
Most High.</p>

<p>The reporter of the Red Cap arrived, an unprepossessing
individual, not quite sober and only
half awake. In spite of this he seemed to find
pleasure in answering truthfully the questions put
by the newcomer.</p>

<p>Once more the doors were flung open and in stalked
a man with as much self-assurance as if he were in
his own home: he was the treasurer of the Inland
Revenue Office and actuary of the Board of Payment
of Employés' Salaries; he approached the chair,
greeted the president like an old acquaintance and
began to rummage in the papers as if they were his
own.</p>

<p>"Who's this?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"The chief clerk," answered his friend from the
Red Cap.</p>

<p>"What? Do they write here, too, then?"</p>

<p>"Too? You'll soon see! They keep a story full
of clerks; the attics are full of clerks and they'll
soon have clerks in the cellars."</p>

<p>The room below was now presenting the aspect of
an ant-heap. A rap of the hammer and there was
silence. The head clerk read the minutes of the
last meeting, and they were signed without comment.
Then the same man read a petition for a fortnight's
leave, sent in by Jon Jonson from Lerbak. It was
granted.<span class="pagenum">[97]</span></p>

<p>"Do they have holidays here?" asked the novice,
surprised.</p>

<p>"Certainly, Jon Jonson wants to go home and
plant his potatoes."</p>

<p>The platform down below was now beginning to
fill with young men armed with pen and paper.
All of them were old acquaintances from the time
when Falk was a Government official. They took
their seats at little tables as if they were going to
play "Preference."</p>

<p>"Those are the clerks," explained the Red Cap;
"they appear to recognize you."</p>

<p>And they really did; they put on their eye-glasses
and stared at the pigeon house with the condescension
vouchsafed in a theatre by the occupants of the
stalls to the occupants of the galleries. They
whispered among themselves, evidently discussing
an absent acquaintance who, from unmistakable
evidence, must have been sitting on the chair occupied
by Falk. The latter was so deeply touched by the
general interest that he looked with anything but a
friendly eye on Struve, who was entering the pigeon
house, reserved, unembarrassed, dirty and a conservative.</p>

<p>The chief clerk read a petition, or a resolution,
to grant the necessary money for the provision of
new door mats and new brass numbers on the lockers
destined for the reception of overshoes.</p>

<p>Granted!</p>

<p>"Where is the opposition?" asked the tyro.</p>

<p>"The devil knows!"</p>

<p>"But they say Yes to everything!"</p>

<p>"Wait a little and you'll see!"</p>

<p>"Haven't they come yet?"</p>

<p>"Here every one comes and goes as he pleases."</p>

<p>"But this is the Government Offices all over
again!"</p>

<p>The conservative Struve, who had heard the
frivolous words, thought it incumbent on him to take
up the cudgels for the Government.<span class="pagenum">[98]</span></p>

<p>"What is this, little Falk is saying?" he asked.
"He mustn't growl here."</p>

<p>It took Falk so long to find a suitable reply that
the discussions down below had started in the meantime.</p>

<p>"Don't mind him," said the Red Cap, soothingly;
"he's invariably a conservative when he has the
price of a dinner in his pocket, and he's just borrowed
a fiver from me."</p>

<p>The chief clerk was reading: 54. Report of the Committee
on Ola Hipsson's motion to remove the fences.</p>

<p>Timber merchant Larsson from Norrland demanded
acceptance as it stood. "What is to become of our
forests?" he burst out. "I ask you, what <i>is</i> to become
of our forests?" And he threw himself on
his bench, puffing.</p>

<p>This racy eloquence had gone out of fashion
during the last few years, and the words were received
with hisses, after which the puffing on the Norrland
bench ceased.</p>

<p>The representative for Oeland suggested sandstone
walls; Scania's delegate preferred box; Norbotten's
opined that fences were unnecessary where
there were no fields, and a member on the Stockholm
bench proposed that the matter should be referred
to a Committee of experts: he laid stress on "experts."
A violent scene followed. Death rather than a committee!
The question was put to the vote. The
motion was rejected; the fences would remain
standing until they decayed.</p>

<p>The chief clerk was reading: 66. Report of the
Committee on Carl Jönsson's proposition to intercept
the moneys for the Bible Commission. At the sound
of the venerable name of an institution a hundred
years old, even the smiles died away and a respectful
silence ensued. Who would dare to attack religion
in its very foundation, who would dare to face
universal contempt? The Bishop of Ystad asked
permission to speak.</p>

<p>"Shall I write?" asked Falk.<span class="pagenum">[99]</span></p>

<p>"No, what he says doesn't concern us."</p>

<p>But the conservative Struve took down the
following notes: Sacred. Int. Mother country.
United names religion humanity 829, 1632. Unbelief.
Mania for innovations. God's word. Man's
word. Centen. Ansgar. Zeal. Honesty. Fairplay.
Capac. Doctrine. Exist. Swed. Chch. Immemorial
Swed. Honour. Gustavus I. Gustavus Adolphus.
Hill Lûtzen. Eyes Europe. Verdict posterity. Mourning.
Shame. Green fields. Wash my hands. They
would not hear.</p>

<p>Carl Jönsson held the floor.</p>

<p>"Now it's our turn!" said the Red Cap.</p>

<p>And they wrote while Struve embroidered the
Bishop's velvet.</p>

<p>Twaddle. Big words. Commission sat for a hundred
years. Costs 100.000 Crowns. 9 archbishops. 30
Prof. Upsala. Together 500 years. Dietaries.
Secretaries. Amanuenses. Done nothing. Proof sheet.
Bad work. Money money money. Everything by its
right name. Humbug. Official sucking-system.</p>

<p>No one else spoke but when the question was put
to the vote, the motion was accepted.</p>

<p>While the Red Cap with practised hand smoothed
Jönsson's stumbling speech, and provided it with
a strong title, Falk took a rest. Accidentally
scanning the strangers' gallery, his gaze fell on a
well-known head, resting on the rail and belonging
to Olle Montanus. At the moment he had the
appearance of a dog, carefully watching a bone;
and he was not there without a very definite reason,
but Falk was in the dark. Olle was very secretive.</p>

<p>From the end of the bench, just below the right
gallery, on the very spot where the abject individual's
pencil chips had fluttered down, a man now arose.
He wore a blue uniform, had a three-cornered hat
tucked under his arm and held a roll of paper in his
hand.</p>

<p>The hammer fell and an ironical, malicious silence
followed.<span class="pagenum">[100]</span></p>

<p>"Write," said the Red Cap; "take down the
figures, I'll do the rest."</p>

<p>"Who is it?"</p>

<p>"These are Royal propositions."</p>

<p>The man in blue was reading from the paper roll:
"H.M. most gracious proposition; to increase the
funds of the department assisting young men of birth
in the study of foreign languages, under the heading
of stationery and sundry expenses, from 50.000
crowns to 56.000 crowns 37 öre."</p>

<p>"What are sundry expenses?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"Water bottles, umbrella stands, spittoons,
Venetian blinds, dinners, tips and so on. Be quiet,
there's more to come!"</p>

<p>The paper roll went on: "H.M. most gracious
proposition to create sixty new commissions in the
West-Gotic cavalry."</p>

<p>"Did he say sixty?" asked Falk, who was
unfamiliar with public affairs.</p>

<p>"Sixty, yes; write it down."</p>

<p>The paper roll opened out and grew bigger and
bigger. "H.M. most gracious proposition to create
five new regular clerkships in the Board of Payment
of Employés' Salaries."</p>

<p>Great excitement at the Preference tables; great
excitement on Falk's chair.</p>

<p>Now the paper roll rolled itself up; the chairman
rose and thanked the reader with a bow which plainly
said: "Is there nothing else we can do?" The
owner of the paper roll sat down on the bench and
blew away the chips the man above him had allowed
to fall down. His stiff, embroidered collar prevented
him from committing the same offence which the
president had perpetrated earlier in the morning.</p>

<p>The proceedings continued. The peasant Sven
Svensson asked for permission to say a few words
on the Poor Law. With one accord all the reporters
arose, yawned and stretched themselves.</p>

<p>"We'll go to lunch now," explained the Red
Cap. "We have an hour and ten minutes." <span class="pagenum">[101]</span></p>

<p>But Sven Svensson was speaking.</p>

<p>The delegates began to get up from their places;
two or three of them went out. The president spoke
to some of the good members and by doing so expressed
in the name of the Government his disapproval
of all Sven Svensson might be going to say. Two
older members pointed him out to a newcomer as
if he were a strange beast; they watched him for
a few moments, found him ridiculous and turned
their backs on him.</p>

<p>The Red Cap was under the impression that
politeness required him to explain that the speaker
was the "scourge" of the Chamber. He was
neither hot nor cold, could be used by no party,
be won for no interests, but he spoke&mdash;spoke. What
he spoke about no one could tell, for no paper reported
him, and nobody took the trouble to look up
the records; but the clerks at the tables had sworn
that if they ever came into power, they would amend
the laws for his sake.</p>

<p>Falk, however, who had a certain weakness for all
those who were overlooked remained behind and
heard what he had not heard for many a day: a
man of honour, who lived an irreproachable life,
espousing the cause of the oppressed and the down-trodden
while nobody listened to him.</p>

<p>Struve, at the sight of the peasant, had taken his
own departure, and had gone to a restaurant; he
was quickly followed by all the reporters and half
the deputies.</p>

<p>After luncheon they returned and sat down on the
narrow stairs; for a little longer they heard Sven
Svensson speaking, or rather, saw him speaking,
for now the conversation had become so lively that
not a single word of the speech could be understood.</p>

<p>But the speaker was bound to come to an end;
nobody had any objections to make; his speech
had no result whatever; it was exactly as if it
had never been made.</p>

<p>The chief clerk, who during this interval had had<span class="pagenum">[102]</span>
time to go to his offices, look at the official papers,
and poke his fires, was again in his place, reading:
"72. Memorial of the Royal Commission on Per
Ilsson's motion to grant ten thousand crowns for
the restoration of the old sculptures in the church of
Träskola."</p>

<p>The dog's head on the rail of the strangers' gallery
assumed a threatening aspect; he looked as if
he were going to fight for his bone.</p>

<p>"Do you know the freak up there in the gallery?"
asked the Red Cap.</p>

<p>"Olle Montanus, yes, I know him."</p>

<p>"Do you know that he and the church of Träskola
are countrymen? He's a shrewd fellow! Look
at the expression on his face now that Träskola's turn
has come."</p>

<p>Per Ilsson was speaking.</p>

<p>Struve contemptuously turned his back on the
speaker and cut himself a piece of tobacco. But
Falk and the Red Cap trimmed their pencils for
action.</p>

<p>"You take the flourishes, I'll take the facts,"
said the Red Cap.</p>

<p>After the lapse of a quarter of an hour Falk's
paper was covered with the following notes.</p>

<p>Native Culture. Social Interests. Charge of
materialism. Accord. Fichte material, Native Culture
not mater. Ergo charge rejected. Venerable temple.
In the radiance morning sun pointing heavenwards.
From heath. times Philos. never dreamt. Sacred
rights. Nation. Sacred Int. Native Cult. Literature.
Academy. History. Antiquity.</p>

<p>The speech which had repeatedly called forth
universal amusement especially at the exhumation
of the deceased Fichte, provoked replies from the
Metropolitan Bench and the bench of Upsala.</p>

<p>The delegate on the Metropolitan bench said that
although he knew neither the church of Träskola nor
Fichte and doubted whether the old plaster-boys
were worth ten thousand crowns, yet he thought<span class="pagenum">[103]</span>
himself justified in urging the Chamber to encourage
this beautiful undertaking as it was the first time
the majority had asked for money for a purpose
other than the building of bridges, fences, national
schools, etc.</p>

<p>The delegate on the bench of Upsala held&mdash;according
to Struve's notes&mdash;that the mover of the
proposition was <i>à priori</i> right; that his premise,
that native culture should be encouraged, was
correct; that the conclusion that ten thousand
crowns should be voted was binding; that the
purpose, the aim, the tendency, was beautiful,
praiseworthy, patriotic; but an error had certainly
been committed. By whom? By the Mother
country? The State? The church? No! By the
proponent? The proponent was right according
to common sense, and therefore the speaker&mdash;he
begged the Chamber to pardon the repetition&mdash;could
only praise the purpose, the aim, the tendency. The
proposition had its warmest sympathies; he was
calling on the Chamber in the name of the Mother
country, in the name of art and civilization, to vote
for it. But he himself felt bound to vote against it,
because he was of the opinion that, conformable to
the idea, it was erroneous, motiveless and figurative,
as it subsumed the conception of the place under that
of the State.</p>

<p>The head in the strangers' gallery rolled its eyes
and moved its lips convulsively while the motion
was put to the vote; but when the proceeding was
over and the proposition had been accepted, the
head disappeared in the discontented and jostling
audience.</p>

<p>Falk did not fail to understand the connexion
between Per Ilsson's proposition and Olle's presence
and disappearance. Struve, who had become even
more loud and conservative after lunch, talked
unreservedly of many things. The Red Cap was
calm and indifferent; he had ceased to be astonished
at anything.<span class="pagenum">[104]</span></p>

<p>From the dark cloud of humanity which had been
rent by Olle's exit, suddenly broke a face, clear,
bright and radiant as the sun, and Arvid Falk, whose
glances had strayed to the gallery, felt compelled
to cast down his eyes and turn away his head&mdash;he
had recognized his brother, the head of the family,
the pride of the name, which he intended to make
great and honourable. Behind Nicholas Falk's
shoulder half of a black face could be seen, gentle
and deceitful, which seemed to whisper secrets into
the ear of the fair man. Falk had only time to be
surprised at his brother's presence&mdash;he knew his
resentment at the new form of administration&mdash;for
the president had given Anders Andersson permission
to state a proposition. Andersson availed
himself of the permission with the greatest calm.
"In view of certain events," he read, "move that
a Bill should be passed making his Majesty jointly
and severally liable for all joint-stock companies
whose statutes he has sanctioned."</p>

<p>The sun on the strangers' gallery lost its brilliancy
and a storm burst out in the Chamber.</p>

<p>Like a flash Count Splint was on his legs:</p>

<p>"<i>Quosque tandem, Catilina!</i> It has come to that!
Members are forgetting themselves so far as to
dare to criticize Government! Yes, gentlemen,
criticize Government, or, what is even worse, make
a joke of it; for this motion cannot be anything but
a vulgar joke. Did I say joke? It is treason!
Oh! My poor country! Your unworthy sons have
forgotten the debt they owe you! But what else
can we expect, now, that you have lost your knightly
guard, your shield and your arms! I request the
blackguard Per Andersson, or whatever his name may
be, to withdraw his motion or, by Gad! he shall see
that King and country still have loyal servants,
able to pick up a stone and fling it at the head of the
many-headed hydra of treason."</p>

<p>Applause from the strangers' gallery; indignation
in the Chamber.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_105" id="Page_105">[105]</a></span></p>

<p>"Ha! Do you think I'm afraid?"</p>

<p>The speaker made a gesture as if he were throwing
a stone, but on every one of the hydra's hundred
faces lay a smile. Glaring round, in search of a
hydra which did not smile, the speaker discovered
it in the reporters' gallery.</p>

<p>"There! There!"</p>

<p>He pointed to the pigeon house and in his eyes
lay an expression as if he saw all hell open.</p>

<p>"That's the crows' nest! I hear their croaking,
but it doesn't frighten me! Arise, men of Sweden!
Cut off the tree, saw through the boards, pull down
the beams, kick the chairs to pieces, break the desks
into fragments, small as my little finger&mdash;he held
it up&mdash;and then burn the blackguards until nothing
of them is left. Then the kingdom will flourish in
peace and its institutions will thrive. Thus speaks
a Swedish nobleman! Peasants, remember his
words!"</p>

<p>This speech which three years ago would have
been welcomed with acclamations, taken down
verbatim and printed and circulated in national
schools and other charitable institutions, was received
with universal laughter. An amended version was
placed on the record and, strange to say, it was only
reported by the opposition papers which do not, as
a rule, care to publish outbursts of this description.</p>

<p>The Upsala bench again craved permission to
speak. The speaker quite agreed with the last
speaker; his acute ear had caught something of
the old rattling of swords. He would like to say
a few words. He would like to speak of the <i>idea</i> of a
joint-stock company as an idea, but begged to be
allowed to explain to the Chamber that a joint-stock
company was not an accumulation of funds, not
a combination of people, but a moral personality,
and as such not responsible....</p>

<p>Shouts of laughter and loud conversation prevented
the reporters from hearing the remainder of the
argument, which closed with the remark that the<span class="pagenum">[106]</span>
interests of the country were at stake, conformable
to the idea, and that, if the motion were rejected
the interests of the country would be neglected and
the State in danger.</p>

<p>Six speakers filled up the interval until dinner-time
by giving extracts from the official statistics
of Sweden, Nauman's Fundamental Statutes, the
Legal Textbook and the Göteberg Commercial
Gazette: the conclusion invariably arrived at was
that the country was in danger if his Majesty were
to be jointly and severally liable for all joint-stock
companies the statutes of which he had sanctioned;
and that the interests of the whole country were at
stake. One of the speakers was bold enough to say
that the interests of the country stood on a throw
of the dice; others were of the opinion that they stood
on a card, others again that they hung on a thread;
the last speaker said they hung on a hair.</p>

<p>At noon the proposition to go into Committee on
the motion was rejected; that was to say, there was
no need for the country to go through the Committee-mill,
the office-sieve, the Imperial chaff-cutter, the
club-winnower and the newspaper-hubbub. The
country was saved. Poor country!<span class="pagenum">[107]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_IX" id="CHAPTER_IX"></a>CHAPTER IX</h2>

<h3>BILLS OF EXCHANGE</h3>


<p>Some time after Arvid Falk's first experience as a
reporter Charles Nicholas Falk and his beloved wife
were sitting at the breakfast table. He was, contrary
to his custom, not in dressing-gown and slippers, and
his wife was wearing an expensive morning-gown.</p>

<p>"Yes, they were all here yesterday," said Mrs. Falk,
laughing gaily, "all five of them, and they were
extremely sorry about the matter."</p>

<p>"I wish the deuce...."</p>

<p>"Nicholas, remember you are no longer standing
behind the counter."</p>

<p>"What am I to say then if I lose my temper?"</p>

<p>"One doesn't lose one's temper, one gets annoyed!
And it's permissible to say: 'It's very extraordinary!'"</p>

<p>"Very well, then, it's very extraordinary that you
have always something unpleasant up your sleeve.
Why can't you refrain from telling me things you know
will irritate me?"</p>

<p>"Vex you, old man! You expect me to keep my
vexations to myself; but you lie&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Lay, old girl!"</p>

<p>"I say <i>lie</i> your burdens on my shoulders too.
Was that what you promised me when we got
married?"</p>

<p>"Don't make a scene, and don't let's have any of
your logic! Go on! They were all here, mamma and
your five sisters?"</p>

<p>"Four sisters! You don't care much for your
family!" <span class="pagenum">[108]</span></p>

<p>"No more do you!"</p>

<p>"No more do I!"</p>

<p>"And they came here to condole with you on
account of my brother's discharge? Is that so?"</p>

<p>"Yes! And they were impertinent enough to say
that I had no longer any reason to be stuck up...."</p>

<p>"Proud, old girl!"</p>

<p>"They said <i>stuck up</i>. Personally I should never
have condescended to make use of such an expression."</p>

<p>"What did you say? I expect you gave them a
piece of your mind?"</p>

<p>"You may depend on that! The old lady
threatened never again to cross our threshold."</p>

<p>"Did she really? Do you think she meant it?"</p>

<p>"No, I don't! But I'm certain that the old
man...."</p>

<p>"You shouldn't speak of your father in that tone!
Supposing somebody heard you!"</p>

<p>"Do you think I should run that risk? However,
the old man&mdash;between you and me&mdash;will never come
here again."</p>

<p>Falk pondered; after a while he resumed the conversation.</p>

<p>"Is your mother proud? Is she easily hurt? I'm
always so afraid of hurting people's feelings, as you
know; you ought to tell me about her weak points,
so that I can take care."</p>

<p>"You ask me whether she is proud? You know;
she is, in her own way. Supposing, for instance, she
was told that we had given a dinner-party without
asking her and my sisters, she would never come here
again."</p>

<p>"Wouldn't she really?"</p>

<p>"You may depend upon it."</p>

<p>"It's extraordinary that people of her class&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"What's that?"</p>

<p>"Oh, nothing; women are so sensitive! How's
your association getting on? What did you call it?"</p>

<p>"The Association for the Promotion of Women's
Rights." <span class="pagenum">[109]</span></p>

<p>"What rights do you mean?"</p>

<p>"The wife shall have the right of disposing of her
own property."</p>

<p>"Hasn't she got it already?"</p>

<p>"No, she hasn't."</p>

<p>"May I ask what your property is of which you are
not allowed to dispose?"</p>

<p>"Half of your's, old man! My dowry."</p>

<p>"The devil! Who taught you such rubbish?"</p>

<p>"It's not rubbish; it's the spirit of the age, my dear.
The new law should read like this: 'When a woman
marries she becomes the owner of half her husband's
property, and of this half she can dispose as she
likes.'"</p>

<p>"And when she has run through it, the husband
will have to keep her! I should take jolly good care
not to."</p>

<p>"Under the new law you would be forced to do so,
or go to the poor-house. This would be the penalty
for a man who doesn't keep his wife."</p>

<p>"Take care! You are going too far! But, have
you any meetings? Who were the women present?
Tell me?"</p>

<p>"We are still busy with the statutes, with the
preliminaries."</p>

<p>"But who are the women?"</p>

<p>"At present only Mrs. Homan, the controller's wife,
and Lady Rehnhjelm."</p>

<p>"Rehnhjelm? A very good name! I think I've
heard it before. But didn't you tell me you were
going to float a Dorcas Society as well?"</p>

<p>"<i>Found</i> a Dorcas Society! Oh, yes, and what d'you
think? Pastor Skore is coming one evening to read a
paper."</p>

<p>"Pastor Skore is an excellent preacher and moves in
good society. I'm glad that you're keeping away from
the lower classes. There's nothing so fatal to man or
woman as to form low connexions. My father always
said that; it was one of his strictest principles."</p>

<p>Mrs. Falk picked up the bread-crumbs from the<span class="pagenum">[110]</span>
tablecloth and dropped them into her empty cup.
Mr. Falk put his fingers into his waistcoat pocket and
brought out a tooth-pick with which he removed some
tiny atoms of coffee grounds lodged between his teeth.</p>

<p>Husband and wife felt self-conscious in each other's
company. Each guessed the thoughts of the other,
and both realized that the first who broke the silence
would say something foolish and compromising. They
cast about for fresh subjects of conversation, mentally
examined them and found them unsuitable; every
one of them had some connexion with what had been
said, or could be brought into connexion with it.
Falk would have liked to have reason for finding fault
with the breakfast, so as to have an excuse for expressing
indignation; Mrs. Falk looked out of the window,
feebly hoping that there might be a change in the
weather&mdash;in vain.</p>

<p>A maid-servant entered and saved the situation by
offering them a tray with the newspapers, at the same
time announcing Mr. Levin.</p>

<p>"Ask him to wait," said the master curtly.</p>

<p>For a few moments his boots squeaked up and down
the room, preparing the visitor who was waiting in the
corridor for his arrival.</p>

<p>The trembling Levin, greatly impressed by the
newly invented waiting in the corridor, was ultimately
conducted into the master's private room, where he
was received like a petitioner.</p>

<p>"Have you brought the bill of exchange with you?"
asked Falk.</p>

<p>"I think so," replied the crestfallen Levin, producing
a bundle of guarantees and blank bills of
various values. "Which bank do you prefer? I have
bills on all with the exception of one."</p>

<p>In spite of the grave character of the situation Falk
could not help smiling as he looked at the incomplete
guarantees on which the name was missing; the bills
fully filled up with the exception of an acceptor's
name, and those completely filled up, which had not
been accepted.<span class="pagenum">[111]</span></p>

<p>"Let's say the Ropemakers' Bank," he said.</p>

<p>"That's the one impossible one&mdash;I'm known
there."</p>

<p>"Well, the Shoemakers' Bank, the Tailors' Bank,
any one you like, only do be quick about it."</p>

<p>They finally accepted the Joiners' Bank.</p>

<p>"And now," said Falk, with a look as if he had
bought the other's soul, "now you had better go and
order a new suit; but I want you to order it at a
military tailor's, so that they will supply you later on
with a uniform on credit."</p>

<p>"Uniform? I don't want&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Hold your tongue, and do as you are told! It
must be finished on Thursday next, when I'm going
to give a big party. As you know, I've sold my shop
and warehouse, and to-morrow I shall receive the
freedom of the city as a wholesale merchant."</p>

<p>"Oh! I congratulate you!"</p>

<p>"Hold your tongue when I'm speaking! You must
go and pay a call now. With your deceitful ways,
your unrivalled capacity for talking nonsense, you
have succeeded in winning the good graces of my
mother-in-law. I want you to ask her what she
thought of the party I gave on Sunday last."</p>

<p>"Did you...."</p>

<p>"Hold your tongue and do as I tell you! She'll be
jealous and ask you whether you were present. Of
course you weren't, for there was no party. You'll
both express discontent, become good friends and
slander me; I know you're an expert at it. But you
must praise my wife. Do you understand?"</p>

<p>"No; not quite."</p>

<p>"Well, it's not necessary that you should; all
you've got to do is to carry out my orders. Another
thing&mdash;tell Nyström that I've grown so proud that I
don't want to have anything more to do with him.
Tell him that straight out; you'll be speaking the
truth for once! No! Hold on! We'll postpone
that! You'll go to him, speak of the importance of
next Thursday; paint for him the great advantages,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_112" id="Page_112">[112]</a></span>
the many benefits, the brilliant prospects, and so on.
You understand me!"</p>

<p>"I understand."</p>

<p>"Then you take the manuscript to the printers'
and&mdash;then...."</p>

<p>"We'll kick him out!"</p>

<p>"If you like to call it that, I have no objection."</p>

<p>"And am I to read the verses to your guests and
distribute them?"</p>

<p>"Hm&mdash;yes! And another thing! Try to meet
my brother; find out all you can about his circumstances
and friends! Make up to him, worm yourself
into his confidence&mdash;the latter's an easy job&mdash;become
his friend! Tell him that I've cheated him, tell
him that I am proud, and ask him how much he'll take
for changing his name."</p>

<p>A tinge of green, representing a blush, spread over
Levin's pale face.</p>

<p>"That's ugly," he said.</p>

<p>"What? And besides&mdash;one thing more! I'm a
business man and I like order in all my transactions.
I guarantee such and such a sum; I must pay it&mdash;that's
clear!"</p>

<p>"Oh, no!"</p>

<p>"Don't talk rubbish! I have no security in case
of death. Just sign this bond made out to the holder
and payable at sight. It's merely a formality."</p>

<p>At the word <i>holder</i> a slight tremor shook Levin's
body, and he seized the pen hesitatingly, although
he well knew that retreat was impossible. In imagination
he saw a row of shabby, spectacled men, carrying
canes in their hands, their breast-pockets bulging with
stamped documents; he heard knocking at doors,
running on stairs, summonses, threats, respite; he
heard the clock on the town hall striking as the men
shouldered their canes and led him&mdash;with clogged feet&mdash;to
the place of execution, where he himself was
finally released, but where his honour as a citizen fell
under the executioner's axe amid the delighted shouts
of the crowd. He signed. The audience was over.<span class="pagenum">[113]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_X" id="CHAPTER_X"></a>CHAPTER X</h2>

<h3>THE NEWSPAPER SYNDICATE "GREY
BONNET"</h3>


<p>For forty years Sweden had worked for the right
which every man obtains when he comes of age.
Pamphlets had been written, newspapers founded,
stones thrown, suppers eaten and speeches made;
meetings had been held, petitions had been presented,
the railways had been used, hands had been
pressed, volunteer regiments had been formed; and
so, in the end, with a great deal of noise, the desired
object had been attained. Enthusiasm was great
and justifiable. The old birchwood tables at the
Opera Restaurant were transformed into political
tribunes; the fumes of the reform-punch attracted
many a politician, who, later on, became a great
screamer; the smell of reform cigars excited many an
ambitious dream which was never realized; the old
dust was washed off with reform soap; it was
generally believed that everything would be right
now; and after the tremendous uproar the country
lay down and fell asleep, confidently awaiting the
brilliant results which were to be the outcome of all
this fuss.</p>

<p>It slept for a few years, and when it awoke it was
faced by a reality which suggested a miscalculation.
There were murmurs here and there; the statesmen
who had recently been lauded to the skies were now
criticized. There were even, among the students,
some who discovered that the whole movement
had originated in a country which stood in very close
relationship to the promoter of the Bill, and that<span class="pagenum">[114]</span>
the original could be found in a well-known handbook.
But enough of it! Characteristic of these days was
a certain embarrassment which soon took the form
of universal discontent or, as it was called, opposition.
But it was a new kind of opposition; it was not, as
is generally the case, directed against the Government,
but against Parliament. It was a Conservative
opposition including Liberals as well as Conservatives,
young men as well as old; there was much misery
in the country.</p>

<p>Now it happened that the newspaper syndicate
<i>Grey Bonnet</i>, born and grown up under Liberal
auspices, fell asleep when it was called upon to
defend unpopular views&mdash;if one may speak of the
views of a syndicate. The directors proposed at the
General Meeting that certain opinions should be
changed, as they had the effect of decreasing the
number of subscribers, necessary to the continuance
of the enterprise. The General Meeting agreed to
the proposition, and the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> became a
Conservative paper. But there was a <i>but</i>, although
it must be confessed that it did not greatly embarrass
the syndicate; it was necessary to have a new chief
editor to save the syndicate from ridicule; that no
change need be made so far as the invisible editorial
staff was concerned, went without saying. The chief
editor, a man of honour, tendered his resignation.
The editorial management, which had long been
abused on account of its red colour, accepted it with
pleasure, hoping thereby, without further trouble, to
take rank as a better class paper. There only remained
the necessity of finding a new chief editor.
In accordance with the new programme of the
syndicate, he would have to possess the following
qualifications: he must be known as a perfectly
trustworthy citizen; must belong to the official
class; must possess a title, usurped or won, which
could be elaborated if necessity arose. In addition
to this he must be of good appearance, so that one
could show him off at festivals and on other public<span class="pagenum">[115]</span>
occasions; he must be dependent; a little stupid,
because true stupidity always goes hand in hand with
Conservative leanings; he must be endowed with a
certain amount of shrewdness, which would enable
him to know intuitively the wishes of his chiefs and
never let him forget that public and private welfare
are, rightly understood, one and the same thing.
At the same time he must not be too young, because
an older man is more easily managed; and finally,
he must be married, for the syndicate, which consisted
of business men, knew perfectly well that
married slaves are more amenable than unmarried
ones.</p>

<p>The individual was discovered, and he was to a
high degree endowed with all the characteristics
enumerated. He was a strikingly handsome man
with a fairly fine figure and a long, wavy beard,
hiding all the weak points of his face, which otherwise
would have given him away. His large, full, deceitful
eyes caught the casual observer and inspired his
confidence, which was then unscrupulously abused.
His somewhat veiled voice, always speaking words
of love, of peace, of honour and above all of patriotism,
beguiled many a misguided listener, and brought
him to the punch table where the excellent man
spent his evenings, preaching straightforwardness and
love of the Mother Country.</p>

<p>The influence which this man of honour exerted
on his evil environment was marvellous; it could
not be seen, but it could be heard. The whole pack,
which for years had been let loose on everything
time-honoured and venerable, which had not even
let alone the higher things, was now restrained and
full of love&mdash;not only for its old friends&mdash;was now&mdash;and
not merely in its heart&mdash;moral and straightforward.
They carried out in every detail the
programme drawn up by the new editor on his
accession, the cardinal points of which, expressed in a
few words, were: to persecute all good ideas if they
were new, to fight for and uphold all bad ones if they<span class="pagenum">[116]</span>
were old, to grovel before those in power, to extol all
those on whom fortune was smiling, to push down all
those who strove to rise, to adore success and abuse
misfortune. Freely translated the programme read:
to acknowledge and cheer only the tested and admittedly
good, to work against the mania of innovation,
and to persecute severely, but justly, everybody
who was trying to get on by dishonest means, for
honest work only should be crowned with success.</p>

<p>The secret of the last clause which the editorial
staff had principally at heart was not difficult to
discover. The staff consisted entirely of people
whose hopes had been disappointed in one way or
another; in most cases by their own fault&mdash;through
drinking and recklessness. Some of them were
"college geniuses," who in the past had enjoyed a
great reputation as singers, speakers, poets or wits,
and had then justly&mdash;or according to them unjustly&mdash;been
forgotten. During a number of years it had
been their business to praise and promote, frequently
against their own inclination, everything that was
new, all the enterprises started by reformers; it was,
therefore, not strange that now they seized the
opportunity to attack&mdash;under the most honourable
pretexts&mdash;everything new, good or bad.</p>

<p>The chief editor in particular was great in tracking
humbug and dishonesty. Whenever a delegate
opposed a Bill which tended to injure the interests
of the country for the sake of the party, he was
immediately taken to task and called a humbug,
trying to be original, longing for a ministerial dress-coat;
he did not say portfolio, for he always thought
of clothes first. Politics, however, was not his
strong, or rather his weak point, but literature.
In days long past, on the occasion of the Old Norse
Festival at Upsala, he had proposed a toast in verse
on woman, and thereby furnished an important
contribution to the literature of the world; it was
printed in as many provincial papers as the author
considered necessary for his immortality. This had<span class="pagenum">[117]</span>
made him a poet, and when he had taken his degrees,
he bought a second-class ticket to Stockholm, in
order to make his début in the world and receive his
due. Unfortunately the Stockholmers do not read
provincial papers. The young man was unknown
and his talent was not appreciated. As he was a
shrewd man&mdash;his small brain had never been
exuberantly imaginative&mdash;he concealed his wound
and allowed it to become the secret of his life.</p>

<p>The bitterness engendered by the fact that his
honest work, as he called it, remained unrewarded
specially qualified him for the post of a literary censor;
but he did not write himself: his position did not
allow him to indulge in efforts of his own, and he preferred
leaving it to the reviewer who criticized everybody's
work justly and with inflexible severity. The
reviewer had written poetry for the last sixteen years
under a pseudonym. Nobody had ever read his
verses and nobody had taken the trouble to discover
the author's real name. But every Christmas his
verses were exhumed and praised in the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>,
by a third party, of course, who signed his article so
that the public should not suspect that the author had
written it himself&mdash;it was taken for granted that the
author was known to the public. In the seventeenth
year, the author considered it advisable to put his
name to a new book&mdash;a new edition of an old one.
As misfortune would have it, the <i>Red Cap</i>, the whole
staff of which was composed of young people who had
never heard the real name, treated the author as a
beginner, and expressed astonishment, not only that a
young writer should put his name to his first book, but
also that a young man's book could be so monotonous
and old-fashioned. This was a hard blow; the old
"pseudonymus" fell ill with fever, but recovered
after having been brilliantly rehabilitated by the <i>Grey
Bonnet</i>; the latter went for the whole reading public
in a lump, charging it with being immoral and dishonest,
unable to appreciate an honest, sound, and
moral book which could safely be put into the hands<span class="pagenum">[118]</span>
of a child. A comic paper made fun of the last point,
so that the "pseudonymus" had a relapse, and, on
his second recovery, vowed annihilation to all native
literature which might appear in future; it did, however,
not apply to quite all native literature, for a
shrewd observer would have noticed that the <i>Grey
Bonnet</i> frequently praised bad books; true, it was
often done lamely and in terms which could be read in
two ways. The same shrewd observer could have
noticed that the miserable stuff in question was always
published by the same firm; but this did not necessarily
imply that the reviewer was influenced by
extraneous circumstances, such as little lunches, for
instance; he and the whole editorial staff were upright
men who would surely not have dared to judge
others with so much severity if they themselves had
not been men of irreproachable character.</p>

<p>Another important member of the staff was the
dramatic critic. He had received his education and
qualified at a recruiting bureau in X-köping; had
fallen in love with a "star" who was only a "star" in
X-köping. As he was not sufficiently enlightened to
differentiate between a private opinion and a universal
verdict, it happened to him when he was for the first
time let loose in the columns of the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> that
he slated the greatest actress in Sweden, and maintained
that she copied Miss&mdash;&mdash;, whatever her name was.
That it was done very clumsily goes without saying,
and also that it happened before the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> had
veered round. All this made his name detested and
despised; but still, he had a name, and that compensated
him for the indignation he excited. One of
his cardinal points, although not at once appreciated,
was his deafness. Several years went by before it was
discovered, and even then nobody could tell whether
or no it had any connexion with a certain encounter,
caused by one of his notices, in the foyer of the Opera
House, one evening after the lights had been turned
down. After this encounter he tested the strength of
his arm only on quite young people; and anybody<span class="pagenum">[119]</span>
familiar with the circumstances could tell by his
critique when he had had an accident in the wings, for
the conceited provincial had read somewhere the unreliable
statement that Stockholm was another Paris,
and had believed it.</p>

<p>The art critic was an old academician who had
never held a brush in his hand, but was a member of
the brilliant artists club "Minerva," a fact which
enabled him to describe works of art in the columns
of his paper before they were finished, thereby saving
the reader the trouble of forming an opinion of his own.
He was invariably kind to his acquaintances, and in
criticizing an exhibition never forgot to mention every
single one of them. His practice, of many years'
standing, of saying something pretty about everybody&mdash;and
how would he have dared to do otherwise&mdash;made
it child's play to him to mention twenty names
in half a column; in reading his reviews one could not
help thinking of the popular game "pictures and
devices." But the young artists he always conscientiously
forgot, so that the public, which, for ten
years had heard none but the old names, began to
despair of the future of art. One exception, however,
he had made, and made quite recently, in an unpropitious
hour; and in consequence of this exception
there was great excitement one morning in the
editorial office of the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>.</p>

<p>What had occurred was this: Sellén&mdash;the reader
may remember this insignificant name mentioned on
a former, and not a particularly important occasion&mdash;had
arrived with his picture at the exhibition at the
very last moment. When it had been hung&mdash;in the
worst possible place&mdash;for the artist was neither a
member of the Academy nor did he possess the royal
medal&mdash;the "professor of Charles IX" arrived;
he had been given this nickname because he
never painted anything but scenes from the life of
Charles IX; the reason again for this was that a long
time ago he had bought at an auction a wine glass, a
tablecloth, a chair, and a parchment from the period<span class="pagenum">[120]</span>
of Charles IX; these objects he had painted for twenty
years, sometimes with, sometimes without, the king.
But he was a professor now and a knight of many
orders, and so there was no help for it. He was with
the academician when his eye fell on the silent man
of the opposition and his picture.</p>

<p>"Here again, sir?" He put up his pince-nez.
"And this, then, is the new style! Hm! Let me
tell you, sir! Believe the word of an old man: take
that picture away! Take it away! It makes me
sick to look at it. You do yourself the greatest
service if you take it away. What do you say, old
fellow?"</p>

<p>The old fellow said that the exhibition of such a
picture was an impertinence, and that if the gentleman
would take his kindly meant advice, he would
change his profession and become a sign-board
painter.</p>

<p>Sellén replied mildly, but shrewdly, that there were
so many able people in that profession, that he had
chosen an artistic career where success could be
obtained far more easily, as had been proved.</p>

<p>The professor was furious at this insolence; he
turned his back on the contrite Sellén with a threat
which the academician translated into a promise.</p>

<p>The enlightened Committee of Purchases had met&mdash;behind
closed doors. When the doors were opened
again, six pictures had been bought for the money
subscribed by the public for the purpose of encouraging
native artists. The excerpt from the minutes
which found its way into the columns of the newspapers,
was worded as follows:</p>

<p>"The Art Union yesterday bought the following
pictures: (1) 'Water with Oxen,' landscape by the
wholesale merchant K. (2) 'Gustavus Adolphus at
the Fire of Magdeburg,' historical painting by the
linen draper L. (3) 'A Child blowing its Nose,'
genre-picture by lieutenant M. (4) 'S. S. Bore in
the Harbour,' marine picture by the shipbroker N.
(5) 'Sylvan Scene with Women,' landscape by the<span class="pagenum">[121]</span>
royal secretary O. (6) 'Chicken with Mushrooms,'
still-life by the actor P."</p>

<p>These works of art, which cost a thousand pounds
each on an average, were afterwards praised in the
<i>Grey Bonnet</i> in two three-quarter columns at fifteen
crowns each; that was nothing extraordinary, but
the critic, partly in order to fill up the space, and partly
in order to seize the right moment for suppressing a
growing evil, attacked a bad custom which was beginning
to creep in. He referred to the fact that
young, unknown adventurers, who had run away
from the academy without study, were trying to
pervert the sound judgment of the public by a mere
running after effect. And then Sellén was taken by
the ears and flogged, so that even his enemies found
that his treatment was unfair&mdash;and that means a
great deal. Not only was he denied every trace of
talent and his art called humbug; even his private
circumstances were dragged before the public; the
article hinted at cheap restaurants where he was
obliged to dine; at the shabby clothes he was forced
to wear; at his loose morals, his idleness; it concluded
by prophesying in the name of religion and
morality that he would end his days in a public
institution unless he mended his ways while there was
yet time.</p>

<p>It was a disgraceful act, committed in indifference
and selfishness; and it was little less than a miracle
that a soul was not lost on the night of the publication
of that particular number of the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>.</p>

<p>Twenty-four hours later the <i>Incorruptible</i> appeared.
It reflected on the way in which public moneys were
administered by a certain clique, and mentioned the
fact that at the last purchase of pictures, not a single
one had been bought which had been painted by an
artist, but that the perpetrators had been officials and
tradesmen, impudent enough to compete with the
artists, although the latter had no other market; it
went on to say that these pirates lowered the standard
and demoralized the artists, whose sole endeavour<span class="pagenum">[122]</span>
would have to be to paint as badly as they did if they
did not want to starve. Then Sellén's name was
mentioned. His picture was the first soulfully conceived
work within the last ten years. For ten years
art had been a mere affair of colours and brushes;
Sellén's picture was an honest piece of work, full of
inspiration and devotion, and entirely original; a
picture which could only have been produced by an
artist who had met the spirit of nature face to face.
The critic enjoined the young artist to fight against
the ancients, whom he had already left a long way
behind, and exhorted him to have faith and hope,
because he had a mission to fulfil, etc.</p>

<p>The <i>Grey Bonnet</i> foamed with rage.</p>

<p>"You'll see that that fellow will have success!"
exclaimed the chief editor. "Why the devil did we
slate him quite so much! Supposing he became a
success now! We should cover ourselves with
ridicule."</p>

<p>The academician vowed that he should not have
any success, went home with a troubled heart, referred
to his books and wrote an essay in which he
proved that Sellén's art was humbug, and that the
<i>Incorruptible</i> had been corrupted.</p>

<p>The <i>Grey Bonnet</i> drew a breath of relief, but
immediately afterwards it received a fresh blow.</p>

<p>On the following day the morning papers announced
the fact that his Majesty had bought Sellén's
"masterly landscape which, for days, had drawn a
large public to the Exhibition."</p>

<p>The <i>Grey Bonnet</i> received the full fury of the gale;
it was tossed hither and thither, and fluttered like a
rag on a pole. Should they veer round or steer
ahead? Both paper and critic were involved. The
chief editor decided, by order of the managing
director, to sacrifice the critic and save the paper.
But how was it to be done? In their extremity they
remembered Struve. He was a man completely at
home in the maze of publicity. He was sent for.
The situation was clear to him in a moment, and he<span class="pagenum">[123]</span>
promised that in a very few days the barge should be
able to tack.</p>

<p>To understand Struve's scheme, it is necessary to
know the most important data of his biography. He
was a "born student," driven to journalism by sheer
poverty. He started his career as editor of the
Socialist <i>People's Flag</i>. Next he belonged to the
Conservative <i>Peasants' Scourge</i>, but when the latter
removed to the provinces with inventory, printing
plant and editor, the name was changed into <i>Peasants'
Friend</i>, and its politics changed accordingly. Struve
was sold to the <i>Red Cap</i>, where his knowledge of all the
Conservative tricks stood him in good stead; in the
same way his greatest merit in the eyes of the <i>Grey
Bonnet</i> was his knowledge of all the secrets of their
deadly foe, the <i>Red Cap</i>, and his readiness to abuse
his knowledge of them.</p>

<p>Struve began the work of whitewashing by starting
a correspondence in the <i>People's Flag</i>; a few lines of
this, mentioning the rush of visitors to the Exhibition,
were reprinted in the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>. Next there
appeared in the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> an attack on the academician;
this attack was followed by a few reassuring
words signed "The Ed." which read as follows:
"Although we never shared the opinion of our art
critic with regard to Mr. Sellén's justly praised landscape,
yet we cannot altogether agree with the
judgment of our respected correspondent; but as, on
principle, we open our columns to all opinions, we unhesitatingly
printed the above article."</p>

<p>The ice was broken. Struve, who had the reputation
of having written on every subject&mdash;except cufic
coins&mdash;now wrote a brilliant critique of Sellén's
picture and signed it very characteristically Dixi.
The <i>Grey Bonnet</i> was saved; and so, of course, was
Sellén; but the latter was of minor importance.<span class="pagenum">[124]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XI" id="CHAPTER_XI"></a>CHAPTER XI</h2>

<h3>HAPPY PEOPLE</h3>


<p>It was seven o'clock in the evening. The band at
Berns' was playing the Wedding March from "A
Midsummer Night's Dream," when to the accompaniment
of its inspiriting strains Olle Montanus
made his entry into the Red Room. None of the
members had yet arrived. Olle looked imposing.
For the first time since his confirmation he was
wearing a high hat. He was dressed in a new suit,
and his boots were without holes; he had had a bath,
had been newly shaved, and his hair was waved as if
he were going to a wedding. A heavy brass chain
ornamented his waistcoat, and his left waistcoat
pocket bulged visibly. A sunny smile lit up his
features; he radiated kindness; one might have
thought that he wanted to help all the world with
little loans. Taking off his overcoat, no longer
cautiously buttoned up, he took the centre of the
sofa in the background, opened his coat and tugged
at his white shirt front so that it rose with a crackle
and stood out like an arch; at every movement the
lining of his waistcoat and trousers creaked. This
seemed to give him as much pleasure as the knocking
of his boot against the leg of the sofa. He pulled out
his watch, his dear old turnip, which for a year and
a month's grace had been in the pawnbroker's hands,
and the two old friends both seemed to enjoy its
liberty.</p>

<p>What had happened that this poor fellow should be
so inexpressibly happy? We know that he had not
drawn the winner in a lottery, that he had not<span class="pagenum">[125]</span>
inherited a fortune, that he had not been "honourably
mentioned," that he had not won the sweet happiness
which baffles description. What had happened then?
Something very commonplace: he had found work.</p>

<p>Sellén was the next to arrive. He wore a velvet
jacket and patent-leather boots; he carried a rug,
a field-glass on a strap, and a cane; a yellow silk
handkerchief was knotted round his throat; his
hands were covered by flesh-coloured gloves and a
flower blossomed in his buttonhole. He was, as
usual, cheerful and calm; his lean, intelligent face
betrayed no trace of the emotions undergone during
the last few days.</p>

<p>Sellén was accompanied by Rehnhjelm; the lad
was unusually subdued; he knew that his friend and
patron was leaving him.</p>

<p>"Hallo! Sellén," said Olle, "you are happy at
last, aren't you, old chap?"</p>

<p>"Happy? What nonsense you are talking! I've
sold a piece of work! The first in five years! Is
that so overwhelming?"</p>

<p>"But you must have read the papers! Your
name's made!"</p>

<p>"Oh! I don't care the toss of a button for that!
Don't imagine that I care for such trifles. I know
exactly how much I still have to learn before I shall
be anybody. Let's talk of it again in ten years'
time, Olle."</p>

<p>Olle believed half of what Sellén said and doubted
the rest; his shirt front crackled and the lining
creaked so that Sellén's attention was aroused.</p>

<p>"By the Lord Harry!" he burst out, "you are
magnificent!"</p>

<p>"Think so? You look like a lion."</p>

<p>Sellén rapped his patent-leather boots with his cane,
shyly smelt the flower in his buttonhole, and looked
indifferent. Olle pulled out his watch to see whether
it was not yet time for Lundell to arrive, which gave
Sellén an opportunity of sweeping the galleries with
his field-glass. Olle was permitted to feel the soft<span class="pagenum">[126]</span>
texture of the velvet coat, while Sellén assured him
that it was an exceptionally good quality at the
price; Olle could not resist asking the cost. Sellén
told him, and admired Olle's studs, which were made
of shells.</p>

<p>Presently Lundell appeared; he, too, had been
given a bone at the great banquet; he was commissioned
to paint the altar-piece for the church of
Träskola for a small sum; but this had not visibly
affected his outward appearance, unless, indeed, his
fat cheeks and beaming face hinted at a more generous
diet.</p>

<p>Falk was with Lundell. He was grave, but he
rejoiced, in the name of the whole world sincerely
rejoiced, that merit had found its just reward.</p>

<p>"Congratulations, Sellén!" he said, "but it's no
more than your due."</p>

<p>Sellén agreed.</p>

<p>"I have been painting just as well these last five
years and all the world has jeered; they were still
jeering the day before yesterday, but now! It's
disgusting! Look at this letter which I received from
the idiot, the professor of Charles IX!"</p>

<p>All eyes opened wide and became keen, for it is
gratifying to examine the oppressor closely, have him&mdash;on
paper at least&mdash;in one's hands, at one's mercy.</p>

<p>"'My dear Mr. Sellén,'&mdash;Fancy that!&mdash;'Let me
welcome you among us'&mdash;he's afraid of me, the
blackguard&mdash;'I have always appreciated your
talent'&mdash;the liar!&mdash;let's tear up the rag and forget
all about him."</p>

<p>Sellén invited his friends to drink; he drank to
Falk, and hoped that his pen would soon bring him
to the front. Falk became self-conscious, blushed
and promised to do his best when his time came; but
he was afraid that his apprenticeship would be a long
one, and he begged his friends not to lose patience
with him if he tarried; he thanked Sellén for his
friendship, which had taught him endurance and
renunciation. Sellén begged him not to talk non<span class="pagenum">[127]</span>sense;
where was the merit of endurance when there
was no other alternative? And where was the virtue
in renouncing what one had no chance of obtaining?</p>

<p>But Olle smiled a kindly smile, and his shirt front
swelled with pleasure, so that the red braces could be
plainly seen; he drank to Lundell and implored him
to take an example from Sellén, and not forget the
Land of Promise in lingering over the fleshpots of
Egypt. He assured him that his friend, Olle, believed
in his talent, that was to say, when he was himself
and painted according to his own light; but whenever
he humbugged and painted to please others he was
worse than the rest; therefore he should look upon
the altar-piece as a pot boiler which would put him
into a position to follow his own inspiration in art.</p>

<p>Falk tried to seize the opportunity of finding out
what Olle thought of himself and his own art, a puzzle
which he had long vainly attempted to solve, when
Ygberg walked into the Red Room. Everybody
eagerly invited him to be his guest, for he had been
forgotten during the last hot days, and everyone was
anxious to show him that it had not been out of
selfishness. But Olle searched in his right waistcoat
pocket, and with a movement which he was anxious
to hide from all eyes he slipped a rolled-up banknote
into Ygberg's coat pocket; the latter understood and
acknowledged it by a grateful look.</p>

<p>Ygberg drank to Sellén; he said that one might
consider, in one way, that Sellén's fortune was made;
but, on the other hand, one might consider, with equal
justification, that it was not so. Sellén was not
sufficiently developed; he still wanted many years'
study, for art was long, as he, Ygberg, had himself
experienced. He had had nothing but ill-luck, therefore
nobody could suspect him of envying a man of
Sellén's reputation.</p>

<p>The envy which peered through Ygberg's words
slightly clouded the sunny sky; but it was only for
a moment, for everybody realized that the bitterness
of a long, wasted life, must be held responsible for it.<span class="pagenum">[128]</span></p>

<p>All the more gladly Ygberg handed Falk a small
newly printed essay, on the cover of which he beheld
with consternation the black portrait of Ulrica
Eleonora. Ygberg stated that he had delivered the
manuscript on the day stipulated. Smith had taken
Falk's refusal with the greatest calm, and was now
printing Falk's poems.</p>

<p>To Falk's eyes the gas-jets lost their brilliancy;
he sat plunged in deep thought; his heart was too
full to find vent in words. His poems were to be
printed at Smith's expense. This was proof that
they were not without merit! The thought was
sufficient food for the whole evening.</p>

<p>The evening passed quickly for the happy circle;
the band ceased playing and the light was turned out;
they were obliged to leave, but, finding the night far
too young for breaking up, they strolled along the
quays, amid endless conversation and philosophical
discussions, until they were tired and thirsty. Lundell
offered to take his friends to see Marie, where they
could have some beer.</p>

<p>They turned towards the north and came to a
street which gave on a fence; the fence enclosed a
tobacco field, bordering on the open country. They
stopped before a two-storied brick-house with a gable
facing the street. From above the door grinned two
sandstone faces whose ears and shins were lost in
fantastic scrolls. Between the heads hung a sword
and an axe. It was formerly the house of the
executioner.</p>

<p>Lundell, apparently quite familiar with the neighbourhood,
gave a signal before one of the windows
on the ground floor; the blind was drawn up; the
window opened, and a woman's head looked out;
a voice asked whether the caller was Albert? No
sooner had Lundell owned to this, his <i>nom de guerre</i>,
than a girl opened the door and, on the promise of
silence, admitted the party. As the promise was
readily given, the Red Room was soon in her apartment,
and introduced to her under fictitious names.<span class="pagenum">[129]</span></p>

<p>The room was not a large one; it had once been
the kitchen, and the range was still standing in its
place. The furniture consisted of a chest of drawers,
of a pattern usually found in servants' rooms; on
the drawers stood a looking-glass, swathed in a piece
of white muslin; above the glass hung a coloured
lithograph, representing the Saviour on the Cross.
The chest was littered with small china figures, scent
bottles, a prayer book, and an ash tray, and with its
looking-glass and two lighted tallow candles seemed
to form a little house altar. Charles XV, surrounded
by newspaper cuttings, mostly representing police
constables, those enemies of the Magdalenes, was
riding on horseback on the wall above the folding
sofa, which had not yet been converted into a bed.
On the window-sill stood a stunted fuchsia, a geranium
and a myrtle&mdash;the proud tree of Aphrodite in the
poor dwelling. A photograph album lay on the
work-table. On the first leaf was a picture of the
King, on the second and third papa and mamma&mdash;poor
country folk; on the fourth a student, the
seducer; on the fifth, a baby; and on the sixth the
fiancé, a journeyman. This was her history, so like
the history of most of them. On a nail, close to the
range, hung an elegant dress, a velvet cloak, and a
hat with feathers&mdash;the fairy disguise in which she
went out to catch young men. The fairy herself was
a tall, ordinary looking young woman of twenty-four.
Recklessness and vigils had given her face that white
transparency which as a rule distinguishes the untoiling
rich, but her hands still showed traces of hard
work. In her pretty dressing-gown, with her flowing
hair down her back, she was the picture of a Magdalene;
her manner was comparatively shy, but she was
merry and courteous and on her best behaviour.</p>

<p>The party split up into groups, continued the
interrupted discussions and started fresh ones. Falk,
who now looked upon himself as a poet and was
determined to be interested in everything&mdash;be it ever
so banal&mdash;began a sentimental conversation with<span class="pagenum">[130]</span>
Marie, which she greatly enjoyed, for she appreciated
the honour of being treated like a human being. As
usual the talk drifted to her story and the motives
which had shaped her career. She did not lay stress
on her first slip, "that was hardly worth speaking
about"; but all the blacker was her account of the
time she had spent as a servant, leading the life of
a slave, made miserable by the whims and scoldings of
an indolent mistress, a life of never-ending toil. No,
the free life she was leading now was far preferable.</p>

<p>"But when you are tired of it?"</p>

<p>"Then I shall marry Vestergren."</p>

<p>"Does he want you?"</p>

<p>"He's looking forward to the day; moreover, I
am going to open a little shop with the money I have
saved. But so many have asked me that question:
'Have you got any cigars?'"</p>

<p>"Oh, yes; here you are! But do you mind my
talking about it?"</p>

<p>He took the album and pointed out the student&mdash;it
is always a student, with a white handkerchief
round his neck, a white student's hat on his knees,
and a gauche manner, who plays Mephisto.</p>

<p>"Who is this?"</p>

<p>"He was a nice fellow."</p>

<p>"The seducer? What?"</p>

<p>"Oh! let it alone! I was every bit as much to
blame, and it is always so, my dear; both are to
blame! Look, this is my baby. The Lord took it,
and I dare say it was for the best. But now let's
talk about something else. Who is that gay dog
whom Albert has brought here to-night? The one
closest to the stove, by the side of the tall one, whose
head reaches up to the chimney?"</p>

<p>Olle, very much flattered by her attention, patted
his wavy hair which, after the many libations, was
beginning to stand up again.</p>

<p>"That is assistant preacher Monsson," said
Lundell.</p>

<p>"Ugh! A clergyman! I might have known it<span class="pagenum">[131]</span>
from the cunning look in his eyes. Do you know
that a clergyman came here last week? Come here,
Monsson, and let me look at you!"</p>

<p>Olle descended from his seat where he and Ygberg
had been criticizing Kant's Categorical Imperative.
He was so accustomed to exciting the curiosity of the
sex that he immediately felt younger; he lurched
towards the lady whom he had already ogled and
found charming. Twirling his moustache, he asked
in an affected voice, with a bow which he had not
learned at a dancing class:</p>

<p>"Do you really think, miss, that I look like a
clergyman?"</p>

<p>"No, I see now that you have a moustache; your
clothes are too clean for an artisan&mdash;may I see your
hand&mdash;oh! you are a smith!"</p>

<p>Olle was deeply hurt.</p>

<p>"Am I so very ugly, miss?" he asked pathetically.</p>

<p>Marie examined him for a moment.</p>

<p>"You are very plain," she said, "but you look
nice."</p>

<p>"Oh, dear lady, if you only knew how you are
hurting me! I have never yet found a woman ready
to love me, and yet I have met so many who found
happiness although they were plainer than I am.
But woman is a cursed riddle, which nobody can
solve; I detest her."</p>

<p>"That's right, Olle," came a voice from the
chimney, where Ygberg's head was; "that's all
right."</p>

<p>Olle was going back to the stove, but he had
touched on a topic which interested Marie too much
to allow it to drop; he had played on a string the
sound of which she knew. She sat down by his side
and soon they were deep in a long-winded and grave
discussion&mdash;on love and women.</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm, who during the whole evening had been
more quiet and restrained than usual, and of whom
nobody could make anything, suddenly revived and
was now sitting in the corner of the sofa near Falk.<span class="pagenum">[132]</span>
Obviously something was troubling him, something
which he could not make up his mind to mention.
He seized his beer-glass, rapped on the table as if he
wanted to make a speech, and when those nearest to
him looked up ready to listen to him, he said in a
tremulous and indifferent voice:</p>

<p>"Gentlemen, you think I am a beast, I know;
Falk, I know you think me a fool, but you shall see,
friends&mdash;the devil take me, you shall see!"</p>

<p>He raised his voice and put his beer-glass down
with such determination that it broke in pieces, after
which he sank back on the sofa and fell asleep.</p>

<p>This scene, although not an uncommon one, had
attracted Marie's attention. She dropped the conversation
with Olle, who, moreover, had begun to
stray from the purely abstract point of the question
and rose.</p>

<p>"Oh! what a pretty boy!" she exclaimed.
"How does he come to be with you? Poor little
chap! How sleepy he is! I hadn't seen him
before."</p>

<p>She pushed a cushion under his head and covered
him with a shawl.</p>

<p>"How small his hands are! Far smaller than
yours, you country louts! And what a face! How
innocent he looks! Albert, did you make him
drink so much?"</p>

<p>Whether it had been Lundell or another was a
matter of no importance now; the man was drunk.
But it also was a fact that he did not need any urging
to drink. He was consumed by a constant longing
to still an inner restlessness which seemed to drive
him away from his work.</p>

<p>The remarks made by his pretty friend had not
perturbed Lundell; but now his increasing intoxication
excited his religious feelings, which had been
blunted by a luxurious supper. And as the intoxication
began to be general, he felt it incumbent on him
to remind his companions of the significance of the
day and the impending leave-taking. He rose, filled<span class="pagenum">[133]</span>
his glass, steadied himself against the chest of drawers
and claimed the attention of the party.</p>

<p>"Gentlemen,"&mdash;he remembered Magdalene's presence&mdash;"and
ladies! We have eaten and drunk
to-night with&mdash;to come to the point&mdash;an intent
which, if we set aside the material which is nothing
but the low, sensual animal component of our nature&mdash;that
in a moment like this when the hour of parting
is imminent&mdash;we have here a distressing example of
the vice which we call drunkenness! Doubtless, it
arouses all one's religious emotion if, after an evening
spent in a circle of friends, one feels moved to propose
a glass to him who has shown more than ordinary
talent&mdash;I am speaking of Sellén&mdash;one should think
that self-respect should to a certain extent prevail.
Such an example, I maintain, has been manifested
here, in higher potency, and therefore I am reminded
of the beautiful words which will never cease ringing
in my ears as long as I am able to think, and I am
convinced they are now in the mind of each one of
us, although this spot is anything but suitable.
This young man, who has fallen a victim to the vice
which we will call drunkenness, has unfortunately
crept into our circle and&mdash;to cut my speech short&mdash;matured
a sadder result than anybody could have
expected. Your health, noble friend Sellén! I wish
you all the happiness which your noble heart deserves!
Your health, Olle Montanus! Falk, too, has a noble
heart, and will come to the front when his religious
sense has acquired the vigour which his character
foreshadows. I won't mention Ygberg, for he has
at last come to a decision, and we wish him luck in
the career upon which he has so splendidly entered&mdash;the
philosophical career. It is a difficult one, and
I repeat the words of the psalmist: Who can tell?
At the same time we have every reason to hope for
the best in the future, and I believe that we can
count on it as long as our sentiments are noble and
our hearts are not striving for worldly gain; for,
gentlemen, a man without religion is a beast. I<span class="pagenum">[134]</span>
therefore ask every gentleman here present to raise
his glass and empty it to all that is noble, beautiful,
and splendid, and for which we are striving. Your
health, gentlemen!"</p>

<p>Religious emotion now overwhelmed Lundell to
such a degree that it was thought best to break up the
party.</p>

<p>Daylight had been shining through the window-blind
for some time and the landscape with the
castle and the maiden stood out brilliantly in the
first radiance of the morning sun. When the blind
was drawn up, day rushed in and illuminated the
faces of those nearest the window; they were deadly
pale. The red light of the tallow candles fell with
magnificent effect on the face of Ygberg, who was
sitting on the stove, clutching his glass. Olle was
proposing toasts to women, the spring, the sun, the
universe, throwing open the window, to give vent
to his feelings. The sleepers were roused, the party
took their leave of Marie, and filed through the front
door.</p>

<p>When they had reached the street, Falk turned
round. Magdalene was leaning out of the window;
the rays of the sun fell on her pale face; her long,
black hair, which shone deep red in the sunlight,
seemed to trickle down her throat and over her
shoulders and to be falling on the street in little
streams. Above her head hung the sword and the
axe and the two grinning faces; but in an apple tree
on the other side of the road perched a black and
white fly-catcher, and sang its frenzied song of joy
that the night was over.<span class="pagenum">[135]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XII" id="CHAPTER_XII"></a>CHAPTER XII</h2>

<h3>MARINE INSURANCE SOCIETY "TRITON"</h3>


<p>Levi was a young man born and educated for business
and on the point of establishing himself with the
assistance of his wealthy father, when the latter
died, leaving nothing but a family totally unprovided
for.</p>

<p>This was a great disappointment to the young man;
he had reached an age when he considered that he
might stop working altogether and let others toil for
him. He was twenty-five and of good appearance.
Broad-shouldered and lean in the flank, his body
seemed specially adapted for wearing a frock-coat in
the manner which he had much admired in certain
foreign diplomatists. Nature had arched his chest in
the most elegant fashion, so that he was capable of
setting off to the fullest advantage a four-buttoned
shirt front, even in the very act of sinking into an
easy chair at the foot of a long Board-table occupied
by the whole Administrative Committee. A beautiful
beard, parted in the middle, gave his young face a
sympathetic and trustworthy expression; his small
feet were made for walking on the Brussels carpet of a
Board-room, and his carefully manicured hands were
particularly suitable for very light work, such as the
signing of his name, preferably on a printed circular.</p>

<p>In the days which are now called the good days,
although in reality they were very bad ones for a
good many people, the greatest discovery of a great
century was made, namely, that one could live more
cheaply and better on other people's money than on
the results of one's own efforts. Many, a great many,<span class="pagenum">[136]</span>
people had taken advantage of the discovery, and as
no patent law protected it, it was not surprising
that Levi should be anxious to profit by it, too, more
particularly as he had no money himself and no
inclination to work for a family which was not his
own. He, therefore, put on his best suit one day and
called on his uncle Smith.</p>

<p>"Oh, indeed! You have an idea," said Smith,
"Let's hear it! It's a good thing to have ideas!"</p>

<p>"I have been thinking of floating a joint stock
company."</p>

<p>"Very good. Aaron will be treasurer, Simon
secretary, Isaac cashier, and the other boys book-keepers;
it's a good idea! Go on! What sort of a
company is it going to be?"</p>

<p>"I'm thinking of a marine insurance society."</p>

<p>"Indeed! So far so good; everybody has to
insure his property when he goes on a voyage. But
your idea?"</p>

<p>"This <i>is</i> my idea."</p>

<p>"I don't think much of it. We have the big society
'Neptune.' It's a good society. Yours would
have to be better if you intend to compete with it.
What would be the novelty in your society?"</p>

<p>"Oh! I understand! I should reduce the premiums
and all the patrons of the 'Neptune' would
come to me."</p>

<p>"That's better! Very well, then, the prospectus
which I would print would begin in this way: 'As
the crying need of reducing the marine insurance
premiums has long been felt, and it is only owing
to the want of competition that it has not yet been
done, we, the undersigned, beg to invite the public
to take up shares in the new society.... What
name?"</p>

<p>"Triton."</p>

<p>"Triton? What sort of a chap was he?"</p>

<p>"He was a sea-god."</p>

<p>"All right, Triton. It will make a good poster!
You can order it from Ranch in Berlin, and we will<span class="pagenum">[137]</span>
reproduce it in my almanac 'Our Country.' Now for
the undersigned. First, of course, my name. We must
have big, well-sounding names. Give me the official
almanac."</p>

<p>Smith turned over the leaves for some time.</p>

<p>"A marine insurance company must have a naval
officer of high rank. Let me see! An admiral."</p>

<p>"Oh! Those sort of people have no money!"</p>

<p>"Bless me! You don't know much about business,
my boy! They are only wanted to subscribe, not to
pay up! And they receive their dividends for
attending the meetings and being present at the
directors' dinners! Here we have two admirals;
one of them has the Commander's Ribbon of the Polar
Star, and the other one has the Russian Order of
Anna. What shall we do? I think we had better take
the Russian, for there is splendid marine insurance
ground in Russia.... There!"</p>

<p>"But is it such a simple matter to get hold of these
people?"</p>

<p>"Tut, tut! Next we want a retired minister of
State! Yes! Well! They are called Your Excellency!
Yes! Good. And a Count! That's more
difficult! Counts have lots of money! And we must
have a professor! They have no money! Is there
such a thing as a Professor of Navigation? That
would be a capital thing for our venture! Isn't there
a School of Navigation somewhere near the South
Theatre? Yes? Very well! Everything is as clear
as possible to me. Oh! I nearly forgot the most
important point. We must have a legal man! A
counsellor of a high court. Here he is!"</p>

<p>"But we have no money yet!"</p>

<p>"Money? What's the use of money in company
promoting? Doesn't the man who insures his goods
pay us money? What? Or do we pay him? No!
Well then, he pays with his premiums."</p>

<p>"But the original capital?"</p>

<p>"One issues debentures!"</p>

<p>"True, but there must be some cash!" <span class="pagenum">[138]</span></p>

<p>"One pays cash in debentures! Isn't that paying?
Supposing I gave you a cheque for a sum, any bank
would cash it for you. Therefore, a cheque is money.
Very well! And is there a law which ordains that
cash shall mean bank-notes? If there were, what
about private bank-notes?"</p>

<p>"How large should the capital be?"</p>

<p>"Very small! It's bad business to tie up large
sums. A million! Three hundred thousand in cash
and the remainder in debentures."</p>

<p>"But&mdash;but&mdash;but! The three hundred thousand
crowns surely must be in bank-notes!"</p>

<p>"Good Lord in Heaven! Bank-notes? Notes are
money! If you have notes, well and good; if you
haven't, it comes to the same thing. Therefore, we
must interest the small capitalists, who have nothing
but bank-notes."</p>

<p>"And the big ones? How do they pay?"</p>

<p>"In shares, debenture guarantees, of course. But
that will be a matter for later on. Get them to
subscribe, and we'll see to the rest."</p>

<p>"And only three hundred thousand? One single
great steamer costs as much. Supposing we insured
a thousand steamers?"</p>

<p>"A thousand? Last year the 'Neptune' issued
forty-eight thousand insurance policies, and did well
out of it."</p>

<p>"All the worse, I say! But if&mdash;but if&mdash;matters
should go wrong...."</p>

<p>"One goes into liquidation!"</p>

<p>"Liquidation?"</p>

<p>"Declares oneself insolvent! That's the proper
term. And what does it matter if the society becomes
insolvent? It isn't you, or I, or he! But one can
also increase the number of shares, or issue debentures
which the Government may buy up in hard times at a
good price."</p>

<p>"There's no risk then?"</p>

<p>"Not the slightest! Besides what have you got
to lose? Do you possess one farthing? No! Very<span class="pagenum">[139]</span>
well then! What do I risk? Five hundred crowns!
I shall only take five shares, you see! And five
hundred is as much as this to me!"</p>

<p>He took a pinch of snuff and the matter was
settled.<br /><br /></p>



<p>The society was floated and during the first ten
years of its activity it paid 6, 10, 10, 11, 20, 11, 5,
10, 36, and 20 per cent. The shares were eagerly
bought up, and, in order to enlarge the business, more
shares were issued; the new issue of shares was
followed by a general meeting of shareholders; Falk
was sent to report it for the <i>Red Cap</i>, whose assistant
reporter he was.</p>

<p>When, on a sunny afternoon in June, he entered the
Exchange, the hall was already crowded with people.
It was a brilliant assembly. Statesmen, geniuses,
men of letters, officers, and civil service men of high
rank; uniforms, dress-coats, orders, and ribbons;
all those here assembled had one big general interest!
The advancement of the philanthropic institution
called marine insurance. It required a great love to
risk one's money for the benefit of the suffering
neighbour whom misfortune had befallen, but here
was love! Falk had never seen such an accumulation
of it in one spot. Although not yet an entirely
disillusioned man, he could not suppress a feeling of
amazement.</p>

<p>But he was even more amazed when he noticed
the little blackguard Struve, the former Socialist,
creeping through the crowd like a reptile, greeted,
and sometimes addressed by distinguished people
with a familiar nod, a pressure of the hand or a friendly
slap on the shoulder. He saw a middle-aged man,
wearing a ribbon belonging to a high order, nodding
to him, and he noticed that Struve blushed and
concealed himself behind an embroidered coat. This
brought him into Falk's vicinity, and the latter
immediately accosted him and asked him who the
man was. Struve's embarrassment increased, but<span class="pagenum">[140]</span>
summoning up all his impudence, he replied, "You
ought to know that! He's the president of the Board
of Payment of Employés' Salaries." No sooner had
the words left his lips than he pretended to be called
to the other side of the room; but he was in so great
a hurry that Falk wondered whether he felt uncomfortable
in his society? A blackguard in the company
of an honourable man!</p>

<p>The brilliant assembly began to be seated. But the
president's chair was still vacant. Falk was looking
for the reporter's table, and when he discovered
Struve and the reporter for the <i>Conservative</i> sitting
at a table on the right-hand side of the secretary he
took his courage into his hands and marched through
the distinguished crowd; just as he had reached the
table, the secretary stopped him with a question.
"For which paper?" he asked. A momentary
silence ensued. "For the <i>Red Cap</i>," answered Falk,
with a slight tremor in his voice; he had recognized
in the secretary the actuary of the Board of Payment
of Employés' Salaries. A half-stifled murmur ran
through the room; presently the secretary said in a
loud voice: "Your place is at the back, over there!"
He pointed to the door and a small table standing close
to it.</p>

<p>Falk realized in a moment the significance of the
word "Conservative," and also what it meant to be
a journalist who was not a Conservative. Boiling
inwardly he retraced his footsteps, walking to his
appointed place through the sneering crowd; he
stared at the grinning faces, challenging them with
burning eyes, when his glance met another glance,
quite in the background, close to the wall. The eyes,
bearing a strong resemblance to a pair of eyes now
closed in death, which used to rest on his face full of
love, were green with malice and pierced him like a
needle; he could have shed tears of sorrow at the
thought that a brother could thus look at a brother.</p>

<p>He took his modest place near the door, for he was
determined not to beat a retreat. Very soon he was<span class="pagenum">[141]</span>
roused from his apparent calm by a newcomer who
prodded him in the back as he took off his coat and
shoved a pair of rubber overshoes underneath his
chair. The newcomer was greeted by the whole
assembly which rose from their seats as one man.
He was the chairman of the Marine Insurance Society
Limited "Triton," but he was something else beside
this. He was a retired district-marshal, a baron, one
of the eighteen of the Swedish Academy, an Excellency,
a knight of many orders, etc. etc.</p>

<p>A rap with the hammer and amid dead silence the
president whispered the following oration: just
delivered by him at a meeting of the Coal Company
Limited, in the hall of the Polytechnic.</p>

<p>"Gentlemen! Amongst all the patriotic and
philanthropic enterprises there are few&mdash;if any&mdash;of
such a noble and beneficial nature as an Insurance
Society."</p>

<p>This statement was received with a unanimous
"Hear! hear!" which, however, made no impression
on the district-marshal.</p>

<p>"What else is life but a struggle, a life and death
struggle, one might say, with the forces of Nature!
There will be few among us who do not, sooner or later,
come into conflict with them."</p>

<p>"Hear! hear!"</p>

<p>"For long ages man, more especially primitive
man, has been the sport of the elements; a ball tossed
hither and thither, a glove blown here and there by
the wind like a reed. This is no longer the case.
I'm correct in saying it is not. Man has determined to
rebel; it is a bloodless rebellion, though, and very
different to the revolutions which dishonourable
traitors to their country have now and again stirred
up against their lawful rulers. No! gentlemen!
I'm speaking of a revolution against nature! Man
has declared war to the natural forces; he has said,
'Thus far shalt thou go and no farther!'"</p>

<p>"Hear! hear!" and clapping of hands.</p>

<p>"The merchant sends out his steamer, his brig, his<span class="pagenum">[142]</span>
schooner, his barge, his yacht, and so forth. The gale
breaks the vessel to pieces. 'Break away!' says the
merchant, for he loses nothing. This is the great
aspect of the insurance idea. Imagine the position,
gentlemen! The merchant has declared war upon
the storms of heaven&mdash;and the merchant has won the
day!"</p>

<p>A storm of applause brought a triumphant smile
to the face of the great man; he seemed thoroughly
to enjoy this storm.</p>

<p>"But, gentlemen, do not let us call an Insurance
Institution a business. It is not a business; we are
not business men. Far from it! We have collected
a sum of money and we are ready to risk it. Is this
not so, gentlemen?"</p>

<p>"Yes, yes!"</p>

<p>"We have collected a sum of money so as to have
it ready to hand over to him whom misfortune has
befallen; his percentage&mdash;I think he pays 1 per
cent.&mdash;cannot be called a contribution; it is called
a premium, and rightly so. Not that we want any
sort of reward&mdash;premium means reward&mdash;for our
little services, which we merely render because we
are interested&mdash;as far as I am concerned it is purely
for this reason. I repeat, I don't think&mdash;there can
be any question that any one in our midst would
hesitate&mdash;I don't think that one of us would mind
seeing his contribution, if I may be allowed to call
the shares by that name, used for the furtherance
of the idea."</p>

<p>"No! No!"</p>

<p>"I will now ask the Managing Director to read
the annual report."</p>

<p>The director rose. He looked as pale as if he had
been through a storm; his big cuffs with the onyx
studs could hardly hide the slight trembling of his
hand; his cunning eyes sought comfort and strength
in Smith's bearded face; he opened his coat and his
expansive shirt front swelled as if it were ready to
receive a shower of arrows&mdash;and read:<span class="pagenum">[143]</span></p>

<p>"Truly, strange and unexpected are the ways of
Providence...."</p>

<p>At the word Providence a considerable number of
faces blanched, but the district-marshal raised his
eyes towards the ceiling as if he were prepared for the
worst (a loss of two hundred crowns).</p>

<p>"The year which we have just completed will long
stand in our annals like a cross on the grave of the
accidents which have brought to scorn the foresight
of the wisest and the calculations of the most cautious."</p>

<p>The district-marshal buried his face in his hands as
if he were praying. Struve, believing that the white
wall dazzled his eyes, jumped up to pull down the
blind, but the secretary had already forestalled him.</p>

<p>The reader drank a glass of water. This caused an
outburst of impatience.</p>

<p>"To business! Figures!"</p>

<p>The district-marshal removed his hand from his
eyes and was taken aback when he found that it was
so much darker than it had been before. There was
a momentary embarrassment and the storm gathered.
All respect was forgotten.</p>

<p>"To business! Go on!"</p>

<p>The director skipped the preliminary banalities, and
plunged right into the heart of the matter.</p>

<p>"Very well, gentlemen, I will cut my speech
short!"</p>

<p>"Go on! Go on! Why the devil don't you?"</p>

<p>The hammer fell. "Gentlemen!" There was so
much dignity in this brief "Gentlemen" that the
assembly immediately remembered their self-respect.</p>

<p>"The Society has been responsible during the year
for one hundred and sixty-nine millions."</p>

<p>"Hear! hear!"</p>

<p>"And has received a million and a half in premiums."</p>

<p>"Hear! hear!"</p>

<p>Falk made a hasty calculation and found that if
the full receipts in premiums, namely, one million and
a half, and the total original capital, one million, were<span class="pagenum">[144]</span>
deducted, there remained about one hundred and
sixty-six millions for which the society was responsible.
He realized what "the ways of Providence"
meant.</p>

<p>"Unfortunately the amount paid on policies was
one million seven hundred and twenty-eight thousand
six hundred and seventy crowns and eight öre."</p>

<p>"Shame!"</p>

<p>"As you see, gentlemen, Providence...."</p>

<p>"Leave Providence alone! Figures! Figures!
Dividends!"</p>

<p>"Under the circumstances I can only propose, in
my capacity as Managing Director, a dividend of 5 per
cent. on the paid-up capital."</p>

<p>Now a storm burst out which no merchant in the
world could have weathered.</p>

<p>"Shame! Impudence! Swindler! Five per cent!
Disgusting! It's throwing one's money away!"</p>

<p>But there were also a few more philanthropic
utterances, such as: "What about the poor, small
capitalists who have nothing but their dividends to
live on? How'll they manage? Mercy on us, what
a misfortune! The State ought to help, and without
delay! Oh dear! Oh dear!"</p>

<p>When the storm had subsided a little and the
director could make his voice heard, he read out the
high praise given by the Supervisory Committee to
the Managing Director and all the employés who,
without sparing themselves, and with indefatigable
zeal, had done the thankless work. The statement
was received with open scorn.</p>

<p>The report of the accountants was then read. They
stated&mdash;after again censuring Providence&mdash;that they
had found all the books in good&mdash;not to say excellent&mdash;order,
and in checking the inventory all debentures
on the reserve fund had been found correct (!) They
therefore called upon the shareholders to discharge
the directors and acknowledge their honest and
unremitting labour.</p>

<p>The directors were, of course, discharged.<span class="pagenum">[145]</span></p>

<p>The Managing Director then declared that under the
circumstances he could not think of accepting his
bonus (a hundred crowns) and handed it to the reserve
fund. This declaration was received with applause
and laughter.</p>

<p>After a short evening prayer, that is to say a humble
petition to Providence that next year's dividend
might be 20 per cent., the district-marshal closed the
proceedings.<span class="pagenum">[146]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIII" id="CHAPTER_XIII"></a>CHAPTER XIII</h2>

<h3>DIVINE ORDINANCE</h3>


<p>On the same afternoon on which her husband had
attended the meeting of the Marine Insurance Society
"Triton," Mrs. Falk for the first time wore a new blue
velvet dress, with which she was eager to arouse the
envy of Mrs. Homan, who lived in the house opposite.
Nothing was easier or more simple; all she had to do
was to show herself every now and then at the window
while she supervised the preparations in her room, intended
to "crush" her guests, whom she expected at
seven. The Administrative Committee of the Crèche
"Bethlehem" was to meet and examine the first
monthly report; it consisted of Mrs. Homan, whose
husband, the controller, Mrs. Falk suspected of pride
because he was a Government official; Lady Rehnhjelm
whom she suspected of the same failing because of her
title, and the Rev. Skore, who was private chaplain
of all the great families. The whole committee was
to be crushed and crushed in the sweetest possible
manner.</p>

<p>The new setting for the scene had already been displayed
at the big party. All the old pieces which were
neither antique nor possessed of any artistic value had
been replaced by brand new furniture. Mrs. Falk
intended to manage the actors in the little play until
the close of the proceedings, when her husband would
arrive upon the scene with an admiral&mdash;he had
promised his wife at least an admiral in full-dress
uniform. Both were to crave admission to the
society. Falk was to enlarge the funds of the society
on the spot by handing over to it a part of the sum<span class="pagenum">[147]</span>
which he had been earning so easily as shareholder of
the "Triton."</p>

<p>Mrs. Falk had finished with the window and was now
arranging the rosewood table, inlaid with mother-of-pearl,
on which the proofs of the monthly report were
to be laid. She dusted the agate inkstand, placed the
silver penholder on the tortoiseshell rack, turned up
the seal of the chrysoprase handle so as to hide her
commoner's name, cautiously shook the cash-box
made of the finest steel wire, so that the value of the
few bank-notes it contained could be plainly read.
Finally, having given her last orders to the footman
dressed up for the parade, she sat down in her drawing-room
in the careless attitude in which she desired that
the announcement of her friend, the controller's wife,
should discover her; Mrs. Homan would be sure to be
the first to arrive.</p>

<p>She did arrive first. Mrs. Falk embraced Evelyn
and kissed her on the cheek, and Mrs. Homan embraced
Eugenia, who received her in the dining-room and
retained her there for a few moments in order to ask
her opinion of the new furniture. Mrs. Homan wasted
no time on the solid oak sideboard dating from the
time of Charles XII, with the tall Japanese vases,
because she felt small by the side of it; she looked at
the chandelier which she found too modern, and the
dining-table, which, she said, was not in keeping with
the prevailing style; in addition to this she considered
that the oleographs were out of place among the old
family portraits, and took quite a long time to
explain the difference between an oil painting and an
oleograph. Mrs. Falk's new silk-lined velvet dress
swished against every corner within reach without
succeeding in attracting her friend's attention. She
asked her whether she liked the new Brussels carpet
in the drawing-room; Mrs. Homan thought it contrasted
too crudely with the curtains; at last Mrs.
Falk felt annoyed with her and dropped her questions.</p>

<p>They sat down at the drawing-room table, clutching
at life-buoys in the guise of photographs, unreadable<span class="pagenum">[148]</span>
volumes of verse, and so on. A little pamphlet fell
into Mrs. Homan's hands; it was printed on gold-edged
pink paper and bore the title: "To the wholesale
merchant Nicholas Falk, on his fortieth birthday."</p>

<p>"Ah! These are the verses which were read at
your party! Who wrote them?"</p>

<p>"A very clever man, a friend of my husband's.
His name's Nyström."</p>

<p>"Hm! How queer that his name should be quite
unknown! Such a clever man! But why wasn't he
at your party?"</p>

<p>"Unfortunately he was ill, my dear; so he couldn't
come."</p>

<p>"I see! But, my dear Eugenia, isn't it awfully sad
about your brother-in-law? I hear he's so very badly
off."</p>

<p>"Don't mention him! He's a disgrace and a grief
to the whole family! It's terrible!"</p>

<p>"Yes; it was quite unpleasant when everybody
asked about him at your party. I was so sorry for
you, dear...."</p>

<p>This is for the oak sideboard, dating from the time
of Charles XII, and the Japanese vases, thought the
controller's wife.</p>

<p>"For me! Oh, please don't! You mean for my
husband?" interrupted Mrs. Falk.</p>

<p>"Surely, that's the same thing!"</p>

<p>"Not at all! I can't be held responsible for all the
black sheep in his family."</p>

<p>"What a pity it was that your parents, also, were
ill and couldn't come! How's your dear father?"</p>

<p>"Thanks. He's quite well again. How kind of
you to think of everybody!"</p>

<p>"Well, one shouldn't think of oneself only! Is he
delicate, the old&mdash;what <i>is</i> his title?"</p>

<p>"Captain, if you like."</p>

<p>"Captain! I was under the impression that my
husband said he was&mdash;one of the crew of the flagship,
but very likely it's the same thing. But where were
the girls?" <span class="pagenum">[149]</span></p>

<p>That's for the Brussels carpet, mentally reflected
the controller's wife.</p>

<p>"They are so full of whims, they can never be
depended on."</p>

<p>Mrs. Falk turned over the leaves in her photograph
album; the binding cracked; she was in a towering
rage.</p>

<p>"I say, dear, who was the disagreeable individual
who read the verses on the night of your party?"</p>

<p>"You mean Mr. Levin; the royal secretary; he's
my husband's most intimate friend."</p>

<p>"Is he really? Hm! How strange! My husband's
a controller in the same office where he's a
secretary; I don't want to vex you, or say anything
unpleasant; I never do; but my husband says that
Levin's in such bad circumstances that it's not wise
for your husband to associate with him."</p>

<p>"Does he? That's a matter of which I know
nothing, and in which I don't interfere, and let me tell
you, my dear Evelyn, I never interfere in my husband's
affairs, though I've heard of people who do."</p>

<p>"I beg your pardon, dear, I thought I was doing
you a service by telling you."</p>

<p>That's for the chandelier and the dining-table.
There only remains the velvet dress.</p>

<p>"Well," the controller's wife took up the thread
again, "I hear that your brother-in-law...."</p>

<p>"Spare my feelings and don't talk of the
creature!"</p>

<p>"Is he really such a bad lot? I've been told that
he associates with the worst characters in town...."</p>

<p>At this juncture Mrs. Falk was reprieved; the
footman announced Lady Rehnhjelm.</p>

<p>Oh! How welcome she was! How kind of her it
was to come!</p>

<p>And Mrs. Falk really was pleased to see the old lady
with the kindly expression in her eyes; an expression
only found in the eyes of those who have weathered
the storms of life with true courage.</p>

<p>"My dear Mrs. Falk," said her ladyship taking a<span class="pagenum">[150]</span>
seat; "I have all sorts of kind messages for you from
your brother-in-law."</p>

<p>Mrs. Falk wondered what she had done to the old
woman that she, too, evidently wanted to annoy her.</p>

<p>"Indeed?" she said, a little stiffly.</p>

<p>"He's a charming young man. He came to see my
nephew to-day, at my house; they are great friends!
He really is an excellent young man!"</p>

<p>"Isn't he?" joined in Mrs. Homan, always ready
for a change of front. "We were just talking about
him."</p>

<p>"Indeed? What I most admire in him is his
courage in venturing on a course where one easily
runs aground; but we need have no apprehensions
so far as he is concerned; he's a man of character and
principle. Don't you agree with me, Mrs. Falk?"</p>

<p>"I've always said so, but my husband thinks
differently."</p>

<p>"Oh! Your husband has always had peculiar
views," interposed Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>"Is he a friend of your nephew's, Lady Rehnhjelm?"
asked Mrs. Falk eagerly.</p>

<p>"Yes, they both belong to a small circle, some of
the members of which are artists. You must have
heard about young Sellén, whose picture was bought
by his Majesty?"</p>

<p>"Of course, I have! We went to the Exhibition
on purpose to have a look at it. Is he one of them?"</p>

<p>"Yes; they're often very hard up, these young
fellows, but that's nothing new in the case of young
men who have to fight their way in the world."</p>

<p>"They say your brother-in-law's a poet," went on
Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>"Oh, rather! He writes excellent verse! The
academy gave him a prize; the world will hear of
him in time," replied Mrs. Falk with conviction.</p>

<p>"Haven't I always said so?" agreed Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>And Arvid Falk's talents were enlarged upon, so
that he had arrived in the Temple of Fame when the
footman announced the Rev. Nathanael Skore. The<span class="pagenum">[151]</span>
latter entered hastily and hurriedly shook hands with
the ladies.</p>

<p>"I must ask your indulgence for being so late," he
said, "but I'm a very busy man. I have to be at a
meeting at Countess Fabelkrantz's at half-past nine,
and I have come straight from my work."</p>

<p>"Are you in a hurry then, dear pastor?"</p>

<p>"Yes, my wide activities give me no leisure.
Hadn't we better begin business at once?"</p>

<p>The footman handed round refreshments.</p>

<p>"Won't you take a cup of tea, pastor, before we
begin?" asked the hostess, smarting under the
unpleasantness of a small disappointment.</p>

<p>The pastor glanced at the tray.</p>

<p>"Thank you, no; I'll take a glass of punch, if I
may. I've made it a rule, ladies, never to differ
from my fellow-creatures in externals. Everybody
drinks punch; I don't like it, but I don't want the
world to say that I'm better than anybody else;
boasting is a failing which I detest. May I now
begin with the proceedings?"</p>

<p>He sat down at the writing-table, dipped the pen
into the ink and read:</p>

<p>"'Account of the Presents received by the Administrative
Committee of the Crèche "Bethlehem"
during the month of May: Signed Eugenia Falk.'"</p>

<p>"Née, if I may ask?"</p>

<p>"Oh, never mind about that," said Mrs. Falk.</p>

<p>"Evelyn Homan."</p>

<p>"Née, if I may make so bold?"</p>

<p>"Von Bähr, dear pastor."</p>

<p>"Antoinette Rehnhjelm."</p>

<p>"Née, madame?"</p>

<p>"Rehnhjelm, pastor."</p>

<p>"Ah! true! You married your cousin, husband
dead, no children. But to continue: Presents...."</p>

<p>There was a general&mdash;almost general&mdash;consternation.</p>

<p>"But won't you sign, too, pastor?" asked Mrs.
Homan.<span class="pagenum">[152]</span></p>

<p>"I dislike boasting, ladies, but if it's your wish!
Here goes!"</p>

<p>"Nathanael Skore."</p>

<p>"Your health, pastor! Won't you drink a glass of
punch before we begin?" asked the hostess with a
charming smile, which died on her lips when she looked
at the pastor's glass. It was empty; she quickly
filled it.</p>

<p>"Thank you, Mrs. Falk, but we mustn't be immoderate!
May I begin now? Please check me by the
manuscript."</p>

<p>"'Presents: H.M. the Queen, forty crowns.
Countess Fabelkrantz, five crowns and a pair of
woollen stockings. Wholesale merchant Schalin, two
crowns, a packet of envelopes, six steel nibs, and a
bottle of ink. Miss Amanda Libert, a bottle of eau-de-Cologne.
Miss Anna Feif, a pair of cuffs. Charlie,
twopence halfpenny from his money box. Johanna
Pettersson, half-dozen towels. Miss Emily Björn, a
New Testament. Grocer Persson, a bag of oatmeal,
a quart of potatoes, and a bottle of pickled onions.
Draper Scheike, two pairs of woollen under....'"</p>

<p>"May I ask the meeting whether all this is to be
printed?" interrupted her ladyship.</p>

<p>"Well, of course," answered the pastor.</p>

<p>"Then I must resign my post on the Administrative
Committee."</p>

<p>"But do you imagine, Lady Rehnhjelm, that the
society could exist on voluntary contributions if the
names of the donors did not appear in print?
Impossible!"</p>

<p>"Is charity to shed its radiance on petty vanity?"</p>

<p>"No, no! Don't say that! Vanity is an evil,
certainly; we turn the evil into good by transforming
it into charity. Isn't that praiseworthy?"</p>

<p>"Oh, yes! But we mustn't call petty things by
high-sounding names. If we do, we are boastful!"</p>

<p>"You are very severe, Lady Rehnhjelm! Scripture
exhorts us to pardon others; you should pardon their
vanity." <span class="pagenum">[153]</span></p>

<p>"I'm ready to pardon it in others but not in myself.
It's pardonable and good that ladies who have nothing
else to do should find pleasure in charity; but it's
disgraceful if they call it a good action seeing that it
is only their pleasure and a greater pleasure than most
others on account of the wide publicity given to it by
printing."</p>

<p>"Oh!" began Mrs. Falk, with the full force of her
terrible logic, "do you mean to say that doing good is
disgraceful, Lady Rehnhjelm?"</p>

<p>"No, my dear; but in my opinion it is disgraceful
to print the fact that one has given a pair of woollen
stockings...."</p>

<p>"But to give a pair of woollen stockings is doing
good; therefore it must be disgraceful to do
good...."</p>

<p>"No, but to have it printed, my child! You aren't
listening to what I'm saying," replied her ladyship,
reproving her stubborn hostess who would not give
in, but went on:</p>

<p>"I see! It's the printing which is disgraceful!
But the Bible is printed, consequently it is disgraceful
to print the Bible...."</p>

<p>"Please go on, pastor," interrupted her ladyship,
a little annoyed by the tactless manner in which her
hostess defended her inanities; but the latter did
not yet count the battle as lost.</p>

<p>"Do you think it beneath your dignity, Lady
Rehnhjelm, to exchange views with so unimportant a
person as I am...?"</p>

<p>"No, my child; but keep your views to yourself;
I don't want to exchange."</p>

<p>"Do you call this discussing a question, may I ask?
Won't you enlighten us on the point, pastor? Can it
be called discussing a question if one party refuses to
reply to the argument of the other?"</p>

<p>"Of course it can't, my dear Mrs. Falk," replied
the pastor, with an ambiguous smile, which nearly
reduced Mrs. Falk to tears. "But don't let us spoil a
splendid enterprise by quarrelling over trifles, ladies!<span class="pagenum">[154]</span>
We'll postpone the printing until the funds are larger.
We have seen the young enterprise shooting up like
a seed and we have seen that powerful hands are
willing to tend the young plant; but we must think
of the future. The Society has a fund; the fund must
be administered; in other words, we must look
round for an administrator, a practical man, able
to transform these presents into hard cash; we must
elect a treasurer. I'm afraid we shall not find one
without a sacrifice of money&mdash;does one ever get
anything without such a sacrifice? Have the ladies
anybody in view?"</p>

<p>No, the ladies had not thought of it.</p>

<p>"Then may I propose a young man of steady
character, who in my opinion is just the right person
for the work? Has the Administrative Committee
any objection to appointing secretary Ekelund to the
post of treasurer at a suitable salary?"</p>

<p>The ladies had no objection to make, especially as
the young man was recommended by the Rev.
Nathanael Skore; and the Pastor felt the more
qualified to recommend him because he was a near
relative of his. And so the Crèche had a treasurer
with a salary of six hundred crowns.</p>

<p>"Ladies," began the pastor again, "have we worked
long enough in the vineyard for one day?"</p>

<p>There was silence. Mrs. Falk stared at the door
wondering where her husband was.</p>

<p>"My time's short and I'm prevented from staying
any longer. Has anybody any further suggestion
to make? No! In calling down the blessing of the
Lord on our enterprise, which has begun so auspiciously,
I commend all of us to His loving mercy;
I cannot do it in a better way than by repeating the
words which He Himself has taught us when He
prayed: 'Abba, Father&mdash;Our Father....'"</p>

<p>He was silent as if he were afraid of the sound of his
own voice, and the Committee covered their faces
with their hands as if they were ashamed of looking
each other in the eyes. The ensuing pause grew long,<span class="pagenum">[155]</span>
unbearably long; yet no one dared to break it;
every one looked through the fingers hoping that
someone else would make the first move, when a
violent pull at the front door bell brought the party
down to earth.</p>

<p>The pastor took his hat and emptied his glass;
there was something about him of a man who is
trying to steal away. Mrs. Falk beamed, for here was
the crushing, the vengeance, the rehabilitation.</p>

<p>Revenge was there and the crushing too, for the
footman handed her a letter from her husband which
contained&mdash;the guests were not enlightened as to its
contents, but they saw enough to make them declare
at once that they had pressing engagements.</p>

<p>Lady Rehnhjelm would have liked to stay and
comfort her young hostess, whose appearance betrayed
a high degree of consternation and unhappiness. The
latter, however, did not encourage her, but on the
contrary was so exceedingly eager to help her visitors
with their hats and cloaks that it looked as if she
wanted to be rid of them as quickly as possible.</p>

<p>They parted in great embarrassment. The footsteps
died away on the staircase and the departing
guests could tell from the nervous haste with which
the hostess shut the door behind them that she longed
for solitude in order to be able to give vent to her
feelings.</p>

<p>It was quite true. Left by herself in the large
rooms Mrs. Falk burst into violent sobs; but her
tears were not the tears which fall like a May shower
on a wizened old heart; they were the tears of wrath
and rage which darken the mirror of the soul and fall
like an acid on the roses of health and youth and wither
them.<span class="pagenum">[156]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIV" id="CHAPTER_XIV"></a>CHAPTER XIV</h2>

<h3>ABSINTH</h3>


<p>A hot afternoon sun was scorching the pavements of
the provincial town X-köping.</p>

<p>The large vaults of the town hall were still deserted;
fir branches were scattered all over the floor, and it
smelt of a funeral. The graduated liqueur bottles
stood on the shelves, having an afternoon nap,
opposite the brandy bottles which wore the collars of
their orders round their necks and were on leave until
the evening; the clock, which could never take a nap,
stood against the wall like a tall peasant, whiling away
the time by contemplating, apparently, a huge playbill,
impaled on a clothes peg close by. The vault
was very long and narrow; both of the long walls
were furnished with birchwood tables, jutting out
from the wall, giving it the appearance of a stable, in
which the four-legged tables represented the horses
tied with their heads to the wall and turning their
hind quarters towards the room; at the present
moment all of them were asleep; one of them lifted
its hind leg a little off the ground, for the floor was
very uneven. One could see that they were fast
asleep, for the flies were calmly walking up and down
their backs.</p>

<p>The sixteen-year-old waiter who was leaning against
the tall clock close to the poster was not asleep; he
was incessantly waving his white apron at the flies
which had just finished their dinner in the kitchen
and were now playing about the vaults. Every now
and then he leaned back and put his ear to the chest
of the clock, as if he were sounding it, or wanting to<span class="pagenum">[157]</span>
find out what it had had for dinner. He was soon to
be enlightened. The tall creature gave a sob, and
exactly four minutes later it sobbed again; a groaning
and rumbling in its inside made the lad jump;
rattling terribly it struck six times, after which it
continued its silent work.</p>

<p>The boy, too, began to work. He walked round his
stable, grooming his horses with his apron and putting
everything in order as if he were expecting visitors.
On one of the tables, in the background, from which a
spectator could view the whole long room, he placed
matches, a bottle of absinth and two glasses, a liqueur
glass and a tumbler; then he fetched a bottle of
water from the pump and put it on the table by the
side of the inflammables. When everything was
ready, he paced up and down the room, occasionally
striking quite unexpected attitudes, as if he were
imitating somebody. Now he stood with arms folded
across his chest, his head bowed, staring fiercely at the
faded paper on the old walls; now he stood with legs
crossed, the knuckles of his right hand touching the
edge of the table holding in his left a lorgnette, made
of a piece of wire from a beer bottle through which he
sarcastically scanned the mouldings on the ceiling.</p>

<p>The door flew open, and a man of thirty-five entered
with assurance, as if he were coming into his own
house. His beardless face had the sharply cut
features which are the result of much exercise of the
facial muscles, characteristic of actors and one other
class. Every muscle and ligament was plainly visible
under the skin with its bluish shadows on upper lip
and chin, but the miserable wire-work which set these
fine tangents in motion was invisible, for he was not
like a common piano which requires a pedal. A high,
rather narrow forehead with hollow temples, rose like
a true Corinthian capital; black, untidy locks of
hair climbed round it like wild creepers, from which
small straight snakes darted, trying to reach the
sockets of his eyes, but ever failing to do so. In calm
moments his large, dark eyes looked gentle and sad,<span class="pagenum">[158]</span>
but there were times when they blazed and then the
pupils looked like the muzzles of a revolver.</p>

<p>He took his seat at the table which the boy had
prepared and looked sadly at the water bottle.</p>

<p>"Why do you always give me a bottle of water,
Gustav?"</p>

<p>"So that you won't be burned to death, sir."</p>

<p>"What does it matter to you whether I am or not?
Can't I burn if I like?"</p>

<p>"Don't be a nihilist to-day, sir."</p>

<p>"Nihilist? Who talked to you of nihilists?
When did you hear that word? Are you mad, boy?
Speak!"</p>

<p>He rose to his feet and fired a few shots from his
dark revolvers.</p>

<p>Fear and consternation at the expression in the
actor's face kept Gustav tongue tied.</p>

<p>"Answer, boy, when did you hear this word?"</p>

<p>"Mr. Montanus said it a few days ago, when he
came here from his church," answered the boy timidly.</p>

<p>"Montanus, indeed!" said the melancholy man,
sitting down again. "Montanus is my man: he has
a large understanding. I say, Gustav, what's the
name, I mean the nickname, by which these theatrical
blackguards call me? Tell me! You needn't be
afraid."</p>

<p>"I'd rather not, sir; it's very ugly."</p>

<p>"Why not if you can please me by doing so?
Don't you think I could do with a little cheering up?
Do I look so frightfully gay? Out with it! What
do they say when they ask you whether I have been
here? Don't they say: Has...."</p>

<p>"The devil...."</p>

<p>"Ah, the devil! They hate me, don't they?"</p>

<p>"Yes, they do!"</p>

<p>"Good! But why? Have I done them any
harm?"</p>

<p>"No, they can't say that, sir."</p>

<p>"No, I don't think they can."</p>

<p>"But they say that you ruin people, sir." <span class="pagenum">[159]</span></p>

<p>"Ruin?"</p>

<p>"Yes, they say that you ruined me, sir, because I
find that there's nothing new in the world."</p>

<p>"Hm! Hm! I suppose you tell them that their
jokes are stale?"</p>

<p>"Yes; everything they say is stale; they are so
stale themselves that they make me sick."</p>

<p>"Indeed! And don't you think that being a
waiter is stale?"</p>

<p>"Yes, I do; life and death and everything is an old
story&mdash;no&mdash;to be an actor would be something new."</p>

<p>"No, my friend. That is the stalest of all stale
stories. But shut up, now! I want to forget myself."</p>

<p>He drank his absinth and rested his head against
the wall with its long, brown streak, the track on
which the smoke of his cigar had ascended during the
six long years he had been sitting there, smoking. The
rays of the sun fell through the window, passing
through the sieve of the great aspens outside, whose
light foliage, dancing in the evening breeze, threw a
tremulous net on the long wall. The shadow of the
melancholy man's head, with its untidy locks of hair,
fell on the lowest corner of the net and looked very
much like a huge spider.</p>

<p>Gustav had returned to the clock, where he sat
plunged in nihilistic silence, watching the flies dancing
round the hanging lamp.</p>

<p>"Gustav!" came a voice from the spider's web.</p>

<p>"Yes sir!" was the prompt response from the
clock.</p>

<p>"Are your parents still alive?"</p>

<p>"No, sir, you know they aren't."</p>

<p>"Good for you."</p>

<p>A long pause.</p>

<p>"Gustav!"</p>

<p>"Yes sir!"</p>

<p>"Can you sleep at night?"</p>

<p>"What do you mean, sir?" answered Gustav
blushing.<span class="pagenum">[160]</span></p>

<p>"What I say!"</p>

<p>"Of course I can! Why shouldn't I?"</p>

<p>"Why do you want to be an actor?"</p>

<p>"I don't know! I believe I should be happy!"</p>

<p>"Aren't you happy now?"</p>

<p>"I don't know! I don't think so!"</p>

<p>"Has Mr. Rehnhjelm been here again?"</p>

<p>"No, sir, but he said he would come here to meet
you about this time."</p>

<p>A long pause; the door opened and a shadow fell
into the spider's net; it trembled, and the spider in
the corner made a quick movement.</p>

<p>"Mr. Rehnhjelm?" said the melancholy head.</p>

<p>"Mr. Falander?"</p>

<p>"Glad to meet you! You came here before?"</p>

<p>"Yes; I arrived this afternoon and called at once.
You'll guess my purpose. I want to go on the stage."</p>

<p>"Do you really? You amaze me!"</p>

<p>"Amaze you?"</p>

<p>"Yes! But why do you come to me first?"</p>

<p>"Because I know that you are one of our finest
actors and because a mutual friend, Mr. Montanus,
the sculptor, told me that you were in every way to be
trusted."</p>

<p>"Did he? Well, what can I do for you?"</p>

<p>"I want advice."</p>

<p>"Won't you sit down?"</p>

<p>"If I may act as host...."</p>

<p>"I couldn't think of such a thing."</p>

<p>"Then as my own guest, if you don't mind."</p>

<p>"As you like! You want advice?&mdash;Hm! Shall
I give you my candid opinion? Yes, of course!
Then listen to me, take what I'm going to say
seriously, and never forget that I said such and such
a thing on such and such an evening; I'll be responsible
for my words."</p>

<p>"Give me your candid opinion! I'm prepared for
anything."</p>

<p>"Have you ordered your horses? No? Then do
so and go home." <span class="pagenum">[161]</span></p>

<p>"Do you think me incapable of becoming an
actor?"</p>

<p>"By no means! I don't think anybody in all the
world incapable of that. On the contrary! Everybody,
has more or less talent for acting."</p>

<p>"Very well then!"</p>

<p>"Oh! the reality is so different from your dream!
You're young, your blood flows quickly through your
veins, a thousand pictures, bright and beautiful like
the pictures in a fairy tale throng your brain; you
want to bring them to the light, show them to the
world and in doing so experience a great joy&mdash;isn't
that so?"</p>

<p>"Yes, yes, you're expressing my very thoughts!"</p>

<p>"I only supposed quite a common case&mdash;I don't
suspect bad motives behind everything, although I
have a bad opinion of most things! Well, then, this
desire of yours is so strong, that you would rather
suffer want, humiliate yourself, allow yourself to be
sucked dry by vampires, lose your social reputation,
become bankrupt, go to the dogs&mdash;than turn back.
Am I right?"</p>

<p>"Yes! How well you know me!"</p>

<p>"I once knew a young man&mdash;I know him no
longer, he is so changed! He was fifteen years old
when he left the penitentiary which every community
keeps for the children who commit the outrageous
crime of being born, and where the innocent little
ones are made to atone for their parents' fall from
grace&mdash;for what should otherwise become of society?
Please remind me to keep to the subject! On leaving
it he went for five years to Upsala and read a terrible
number of books; his brain was divided into six
pigeon-holes in which six kinds of information, dates,
names, a whole warehouseful of ready-made opinions,
conclusions, theories, ideas and nonsense of every
description, were stored like a general cargo. This
might have been allowed to pass, for there's plenty
of room in a brain. But he was also supposed to
accept foreign thoughts, rotten, old thoughts, which<span class="pagenum">[162]</span>
others had chewed for a life-time, and which they now
vomited. It filled him with nausea and&mdash;he was
twenty years old&mdash;he went on the stage. Look at my
watch! Look at the second-hand; it makes sixty
little steps before a minute has passed; sixty times
sixty before it is an hour; twenty-four times the
number and it is a day; three hundred and sixty-five
times and it is only a year. Now imagine ten years!
Did you ever wait for a friend outside his house?
The first quarter of an hour passes like a flash! The
second quarter&mdash;oh! one doesn't mind waiting for a
person one's fond of; the third quarter: he's not
coming; the fourth: hope and fear; the fifth: one
goes away but hurries back; the sixth: Damn it all!
I've wasted my time for nothing! the seventh:
having waited so long, I might just as well wait a little
longer; the eighth: raging and cursing; the ninth:
One goes home, lies down on one's sofa and feels as
calm as if one were walking arm in arm with death.
He waited for ten years! Ten years! Isn't my hair
standing on end when I say ten years? Look at it!
Ten years had passed before he was allowed to play a
part. When he did, he had a tremendous success&mdash;at
once. But his ten wasted years had brought him to
the verge of insanity; he was mad that it hadn't
happened ten years before. And he was amazed to
find that happiness when at last he held it within his
grasp didn't make him happy! And so he was unhappy."</p>

<p>"But don't you think he required the ten years for
the study of his art?"</p>

<p>"How could he study it when he was never allowed
to play? He was a laughing-stock, the scum of the
playbill; the management said he was no good; and
whenever he tried to find an engagement at another
theatre, he was told that he had no repertoire."</p>

<p>"But why couldn't he be happy when his luck had
turned?"</p>

<p>"Do you think an immortal soul is content with
happiness? But why speak about it? Your resolu<span class="pagenum">[163]</span>tion
is irrevocable. My advice is superfluous. There
is but one teacher: experience, and experience is as
capricious, or as calculating, as a schoolmaster; some
of the pupils are always praised; others are always
beaten. You are born to be praised; don't think I'm
saying this because you belong to a good family; I'm
sufficiently enlightened not to make that fact responsible
for good or evil; in this case it is a particularly
negligible quantity, for on the stage a man
stands or falls by his own merit. I hope you'll have
an early success so that you won't be enlightened too
soon; I believe you deserve it."</p>

<p>"But have you no respect for your art, the greatest
and most sublime of all arts?"</p>

<p>"It's overrated like everything about which men
write books. It's full of danger and can do much
harm! A beautifully told lie can impress like a
truth! It's like a mass meeting where the uncultured
majority turns the scale. The more superficial the
better&mdash;the worse, the better! I don't mean to say
that it is superfluous."</p>

<p>"That can't be your opinion!"</p>

<p>"That <i>is</i> my opinion, but all the same, I may be
mistaken."</p>

<p>"But have you really no respect for your art?"</p>

<p>"For mine? Why should I have more respect for
my art than for anybody else's?"</p>

<p>"And yet you've played the greatest parts!
You've played Shakespeare! You've played Hamlet!
Have you never been touched in your inmost soul
when speaking that tremendous monologue: To be
or not to be...."</p>

<p>"What do you mean by tremendous?"</p>

<p>"Full of profound thought."</p>

<p>"Do explain yourself! Is it so full of profound
thought to say: Shall I take my life or not? I
should do so if I knew what comes hereafter, and
everybody else would do the same thing; but as we
don't know, we don't take our lives. Is that so very
profound?" <span class="pagenum">[164]</span></p>

<p>"Not if expressed in those words."</p>

<p>"There you are! You've surely contemplated
suicide at one time or another? Haven't you?"</p>

<p>"Yes; I suppose most people have."</p>

<p>"And why didn't you do it? Because, like
Hamlet, you hadn't the courage, not knowing what
comes after. Were you very profound then?"</p>

<p>"Of course I wasn't!"</p>

<p>"Therefore it's nothing but a banality! Or, expressed
in one word it is&mdash;what is it, Gustav?"</p>

<p>"Stale!" came a voice from the clock, a voice
which seemed to have waited for its cue.</p>

<p>"It's stale! But, supposing the poet had given
us an acceptable supposition of a future life, that
would have been something new."</p>

<p>"Is everything new excellent?" asked Rehnhjelm.
Under the pressure of all the new ideas to which he had
been listening, his courage was fast ebbing away.</p>

<p>"New ideas have one great merit&mdash;they are new!
Try to think your own thoughts and you will always
find them new! Will you believe me when I say that
I knew what you wanted before you walked in at that
door? And that I know what you are going to say
next, seeing that we are discussing Shakespeare?"</p>

<p>"You are a strange man! I can't help confessing
that you're right in what you're saying, although I
don't agree with you."</p>

<p>"What do you say to Anthony's speech over the
body of Cæsar? Isn't it remarkable?"</p>

<p>"That's exactly what I was going to speak about.
You seem to be able to read my thoughts."</p>

<p>"Exactly what I was telling you just now. And is
it so wonderful considering that all men think the
same, or at any rate say the same thing? Well, what
do you find in it of any great depth?"</p>

<p>"I can't explain in words...."</p>

<p>"Don't you think it a very commonplace piece of
sarcastic oratory? One expresses exactly the reverse
of one's meaning, and if the points are sharpened, they
are bound to sting. But have you ever come across<span class="pagenum">[165]</span>
anything more beautiful than the dialogue between
Juliet and Romeo after their wedding night?"</p>

<p>"Ah! You mean where he says, 'It is the
nightingale and not the lark'...."</p>

<p>"What other passage could I mean? Doesn't
every one quote that? It is a wonderful poetical
conception on which the effect depends. Do you
think Shakespeare's greatness depends on poetical
conceptions?"</p>

<p>"Why do you break up everything I admire?
Why do you take away my supports?"</p>

<p>"I am throwing away your crutches so that you
may learn to walk without them. But let me ask you
to keep to the point."</p>

<p>"You are not asking, you are compelling me to do
so."</p>

<p>"Then you should steer clear of me. Your parents
are against your taking this step?"</p>

<p>"Yes! How do you know?"</p>

<p>"Parents always are. Why overrate my judgment?
You should never exaggerate anything."</p>

<p>"Do you think we should be happier if we didn't?"</p>

<p>"Happier? Hm! Do you know anybody who is
happy? Give me your own opinion, not the conventional
one."</p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>"If you don't believe anybody is happy, how can
you postulate such a condition as being happier?
Your parents are alive then? It's a mistake to have
parents."</p>

<p>"Why? What do you mean?"</p>

<p>"Don't you think it unfair of an older generation to
bring up a younger one in its antiquated inanities?
Your parents expect gratitude from you, I suppose?"</p>

<p>"And doesn't one owe it to one's parents?"</p>

<p>"For what? For the fact that with the connivance
of the law they have brought us into this world of
misery, have half-starved us, beaten us, oppressed us,
humiliated us, opposed all our wishes? Believe me,
a revolution is needed&mdash;two revolutions! Why don't<span class="pagenum">[166]</span>
you take some absinth? Are you afraid of it?
Look at the bottle! It's marked with the Geneva
cross! It heals those who have been wounded on the
battlefield, friends and foes alike; it lulls all pain,
blunts the keen edge of thought, blots out memories,
stifles all the nobler emotions which beguile humanity
into folly, and finally extinguishes the light of reason.
Do you know what the light of reason is? First, it is
a phrase, secondly, it is a will-o'-the-wisp; one of
those flames, you know, which play about spots where
decaying fish have engendered phosphoretted hydrogen;
the light of reason is phosphoretted hydrogen
engendered by the grey brain substance. It is a
strange thing. Everything good on this earth
perishes and is forgotten. During my ten years'
touring, and my apparent idleness, I have read
through all the libraries one finds in small towns, and
I find that all the twaddle and nonsense contained in
the books is popular and constantly quoted; but the
wisdom is neglected and pushed aside. Do remind
me to keep to the point...."</p>

<p>The clock went through its diabolical tricks and
thundered seven. The door was flung open and a
man lurched noisily into the room. He was a man of
about fifty, with a huge, heavy head, fixed between
a pair of lumpy shoulders like a mortar on a gun
carriage, with a permanent elevation of forty-five
degrees, looking as if it were going to throw bombs at
the stars. To judge from the face, the owner was
capable of all possible crimes and impossible vices, but
too great a coward to commit any. He immediately
threw a bombshell at the melancholy man, and
harshly ordered a glass of grog made of rum, in
grammatical, uncouth language and in the voice of a
corporal.</p>

<p>"This is the man who holds your fate in his hands,"
whispered the melancholy man to Rehnhjelm. "This
is the tragedian, actor-manager, and my deadly foe."</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm could not suppress a shudder of disgust
as he looked at the terrible individual who, after<span class="pagenum">[167]</span>
having exchanged a look of hatred with Falander, now
closed the passage of arms by repeated expectorations.</p>

<p>The door opened again, and in glided the almost
elegant figure of a middle-aged man with oily hair
and a waxed moustache. He familiarly took his
place by the side of the actor-manager, who gave him
his middle finger on which shone a ring with a large
cornelian.</p>

<p>"This is the editor of the Conservative paper, the
defender of throne and altar. He has the run of the
theatre and tries to seduce all the girls on whom the
actor-manager hasn't cast his eye. He started his
career as a Government official, but had to resign his
post, I'm ashamed to tell you why," explained
Falander. "But I am also ashamed to remain in the
same room with these gentlemen, and, moreover, I
have asked a few friends here, to-night, to a little
supper in celebration of my recent benefit. If you
care to spend the evening in bad company, among the
most unimportant actors, two notorious ladies and an
old blackguard, you are welcome at eight."</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm hesitated a moment before he accepted
the invitation.</p>

<p>The spider on the wall climbed through his net as if
to examine it and disappeared. The fly remained in
its place a little longer. The sun sank behind the
cathedral, the meshes of the net were undone as if
they had never existed, and the aspens outside the
window shivered. The great man and stage-director
raised his voice and shouted&mdash;he had forgotten how to
speak:</p>

<p>"Did you see the attack on me in the <i>Weekly</i>?"</p>

<p>"Don't take any notice of such piffle."</p>

<p>"Take no notice of it? What the devil do you
mean? Doesn't everybody read it? Of course the
whole town does! I should like to give him a horse-whipping!
The impertinent rascal calls me affected
and exaggerated."</p>

<p>"Bribe him! Don't make a fuss!"</p>

<p>"Bribe him? Haven't I tried it? But these<span class="pagenum">[168]</span>
Liberal journalists are damned queer. If you are on
friendly terms with them, they'll give you a nice
enough notice; but they won't be bribed however
poor they may be."</p>

<p>"Oh! You don't go about it in the right way!
You shouldn't do it openly, you could send them
presents which they can turn into cash, or cash, if you
like, but anonymously, and never refer to it."</p>

<p>"As I do in your case! No, old chap, the trick
doesn't work in their case. I've tried it! It's hell
to reckon with people with opinions."</p>

<p>"Who do you think was the victim in the devil's
clutches, to change the subject?"</p>

<p>"That's nothing to do with me."</p>

<p>"Oh, but I think it has! Gustav! Who was the
gentleman with Mr. Falander?"</p>

<p>"His name's Rehnhjelm! He wants to go on the
stage."</p>

<p>"What do you say? He wants to go on the
stage? He!" shouted the actor-manager.</p>

<p>"Yes, that's it!" replied Gustav.</p>

<p>"And, of course, act tragedy parts? And be
Falander's protégé? And not come to me? And
take away my parts? And honour us by playing
here? And I know nothing about the whole matter?
I? I? I'm sorry for him! It's a pity! Bad
prospects for him. Of course, I shall patronize him!
I'll take him under my wing! The strength of my
wings may be felt even when I don't fly! They have
a way of pinching now and then! He was a nice
looking lad! A smart lad! Beautiful as Antinous!
What a pity he didn't come to me first, I should have
given him Falander's parts, every one of them! Oh!
Oh! Oh! But it isn't too late yet! Hah! Let
the devil corrupt him first! He's still a little too
fresh! He really looked quite an innocent boy!
Poor little chap! I'll only say 'God help him!'"</p>

<p>The sound of the last sentence was drowned in the
noise made by the grog drinkers of the whole town
who were now beginning to arrive.<span class="pagenum">[169]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XV" id="CHAPTER_XV"></a>CHAPTER XV</h2>

<h3>THE THEATRICAL COMPANY "PH&OElig;NIX"</h3>


<p>On the following day Rehnhjelm awoke late in the
morning in his hotel bed. Memories of the previous
night arose like phantoms and crowded round him.</p>

<p>He saw again the pretty, closely shuttered room,
richly decorated with flowers, in which the orgy
had been held. He saw the actress, a lady of thirty-five
who, thanks to a younger rival, had to play the
parts of old women; he saw her entering the room,
in a frenzy of rage and despair at the fresh humiliations
heaped upon her, throwing herself full length
on the sofa, drinking glass after glass of wine and,
when the temperature of the room rose, opening her
bodice, as a man opens his waistcoat after a too-plentiful
dinner.</p>

<p>He saw again the old comedian who, after a very
short career, had been degraded from playing lead
to taking servant's parts; he now entertained the
tradespeople of the town with his songs, and, above
all, with the stories of his short glory.</p>

<p>But, in the very heart of the clouds of smoke and
his drunken visions Rehnhjelm saw the picture of a
young girl of sixteen, who had arrived with tears in
her eyes, and told the melancholy Falander that the
great actor-manager had again been persecuting her
with insulting proposals, vowing that in future, unless
she would accede to them, she should play only the
very smallest parts.</p>

<p>And he saw Falander, listening to everybody's
troubles and complaints, breathing on them until
they vanished; he watched him, reducing insults,<span class="pagenum">[170]</span>
humiliations, kicks, accidents, want, misery, and
grief to nothing; watched him teaching his friends
and warning them never to exaggerate anything,
least of all their troubles.</p>

<p>But again and again his thoughts reverted to the
little girl of sixteen with the innocent face, with whom
he had made friends, and who had kissed him when
they parted, hungrily, passionately. To be quite
candid, her kiss had taken him by surprise. But
what <i>was</i> her name?</p>

<p>He rose, and stretching out his hand for the water-bottle,
he seized a tiny handkerchief, spotted with
wine. Ah! Here was her name, ineffaceable,
written in marking ink&mdash;Agnes! He kissed the handkerchief
twice on the cleanest spot and put it into
his box.</p>

<p>When he had carefully dressed himself, he went
out to see the actor-manager, whom he confidently
expected to find at the theatre between twelve and
three.</p>

<p>To be on the safe side, he arrived at the office at
twelve o'clock; he found no one there but a porter,
who asked him what he wanted and put himself at
his service.</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm did not think that he would need his
help, and asked to see the actor-manager; he was
told that the actor-manager was at the present
moment at the factory, but would no doubt come to
the office in the course of the afternoon.</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm supposed factory to be a slang expression
for theatre, but the porter explained to him that
the actor-manager was also a match manufacturer.
His brother-in-law, the cashier, was a post office
employé and never came to the theatre before two
o'clock; his son, the secretary, had a post in the
telegraph office, and his presence could never be
safely relied upon. But the porter, who seemed to
guess the object of Rehnhjelm's visit, handed him,
on his own responsibility and in the name of the
theatre, a copy of the statutes; the young gentleman<span class="pagenum">[171]</span>
was at liberty to amuse himself with it until one of
the managerial staff arrived.</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm possessed his soul in patience and sat
down on the sofa to study the documents. It was
half-past twelve when he had finished reading them.
He talked to the porter until a quarter to one, and
then set himself to fathom the meaning of paragraph
1 of the statutes. "The theatre is a moral
institution," it ran, "therefore the members of the
company should endeavour to live in the fear of God,
and to lead a virtuous and moral life." He turned
and twisted the sentence about, trying to throw light
upon it, without succeeding. "If the theatre is a
moral institution," he mused, "the members who&mdash;in
addition to the manager, the cashier, the secretary,
the machinists, and scene-shifters&mdash;form the institution,
need not endeavour to practise all these beautiful
things. If it said: The theatre is an immoral
institution and therefore ... there would be some
sense in it; but that, surely, the management does not
intend to convey."</p>

<p>He thought of Hamlet's "words, words," but
immediately remembered that to quote Hamlet was
stale, and that one ought to clothe one's thoughts in
one's own words; he chose his own term, and called
the regulations nonsense, but discarded the expression
again, because it was not original; but then the
original was not original either.</p>

<p>Paragraph 2 helped him to while away a quarter
of an hour in meditation on the text: "The theatre
is not a place for amusement; it does not merely
exist to give pleasure." In one place it said the
theatre is not a place for amusement and in another
the theatre does not "merely" exist to give pleasure,
therefore it did exist to give pleasure&mdash;to a certain
extent.</p>

<p>He reflected under what circumstances the theatre
ministered to one's pleasure. It was amusing to see
children, especially sons, defrauding their parents,
more particularly when the parents were thrifty, good<span class="pagenum">[172]</span>hearted,
and sensible; it was amusing to see wives
deceiving their husbands; especially when the
husband was old and required his wife's care. Besides
this he remembered having laughed very heartily
at two old men who nearly died of starvation because
their business was on the decline, and that to this
day all the world laughed at it in a piece written by
a classical author. He also recollected having been
much amused by the misfortune of an elderly man
who had become deaf; and that, together with six
hundred other men and women, he had shouted with
laughter at a priest, who tried, by natural means, to
cure his insanity, the result of self-restraint; his
mirth had been particularly stimulated by the
hypocrisy displayed by the wily priest in order to
gain the object of his desire.</p>

<p>Why does one laugh? he wondered. And as he
had nothing else to do, he tried to find an answer.
One laughed at misfortune, want, misery, vice, virtue,
the defeat of good, the victory of evil.</p>

<p>This conclusion, which was partly new to him, put
him into a good temper; he found a great deal of
amusement in playing with his thoughts. As the
management still remained invisible, he went on
playing, and, before the lapse of five minutes, he had
come to the following conclusion: In a tragedy one
weeps at just those things which in comedy make one
laugh.</p>

<p>At this point his thoughts were arrested; the great
actor-manager burst into the room, brushed past
Rehnhjelm without apparently being aware of his
presence and entered a room on the left, whither, a
moment afterwards, the violent ringing of a bell
summoned the porter. In less than half a minute he
had gone in and come out again, announcing that
his Highness was ready to receive the visitor.</p>

<p>As Rehnhjelm entered the director had already
fired his shot and his mortar was fixed at an angle
which quite prevented him from perceiving the
nervous mortal who was timidly coming into the<span class="pagenum">[173]</span>
room. But he had no doubt heard him, for he asked
him immediately, in an offensive manner, what he
wanted.</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm stammered that he was anxious to
make his début on the stage.</p>

<p>"What? A début? Have you a repertory,
sir? Have you played 'Hamlet,' 'Lear,' 'Richard
Sheridan'; been called ten times before the curtain
after the third act? What?"</p>

<p>"I've never played a part."</p>

<p>"Oh, I see! That's quite another thing!"</p>

<p>He sat down in an easy-chair painted with silver
paint and covered with blue brocade. His face had
become a mask. He might have been sitting for a
portrait for one of the biographies of Suetonius.</p>

<p>"Shall I give you my candid opinion, what?
Leave the theatrical profession alone!"</p>

<p>"Impossible!"</p>

<p>"I repeat, leave it alone! It's the worst of all
professions! Full of humiliations, unpleasantnesses,
little annoyances, and thorns which will embitter
your life so that you'll wish you had never been born."</p>

<p>He looked as if he were speaking the truth, but
Rehnhjelm's resolution was not to be shaken.</p>

<p>"I beg you to take my advice! I solemnly adjure
you to drop this idea. I tell you that the prospects
are so bad, that for years to come you'll have simply
to walk on. Think of it! And don't come to me
with complaints when it is too late. The theatrical
career is so infernally difficult, sir, that you would not
dream of taking it up, if you had the least knowledge
of it! It's a hell! believe me. I have spoken."</p>

<p>It was a waste of breath.</p>

<p>"Well, wouldn't you prefer an engagement without
a début? The risk is less great."</p>

<p>"I shall be only too pleased; I never expected
more."</p>

<p>"Then you'd better sign this agreement. A salary
of twelve hundred crowns and a two years' engagement.
Do you agree?" <span class="pagenum">[174]</span></p>

<p>He pulled a filled-up agreement, signed by the
management, from underneath the blotting-pad, and
gave it to Rehnhjelm. The latter's brain was
whirling at the thought of the twelve hundred crowns
and he signed it without a look at the contents.</p>

<p>When he had signed the actor-manager held out
his large middle finger with the cornelian ring, and
said: "Be welcome!" He flashed at him with the
gums of his upper jaw and the yellow and bloodshot
whites of his eyes with their green irises.</p>

<p>The audience was over. But Rehnhjelm&mdash;in whose
opinion the whole business had been hurried through
far too quickly&mdash;instead of moving, took the liberty
of asking whether he had not better wait until all the
members of the management were assembled.</p>

<p>"The management?" shouted the great tragedian.
"I am the management. If you have any questions
to ask, address yourself to me! If you want advice,
come to me! To me, sir! To nobody else! That's
all! You can go now!"</p>

<p>The skirt of Rehnhjelm's coat must have caught on
a nail, for he turned on the threshold to see what the
last words looked like; but he saw only the red gums,
which had the appearance of an instrument of torture,
and the bloodshot eyes; he felt no desire to ask for
an explanation, but went straight to the vaults
of the town hall to have some dinner and meet
Falander.</p>

<p>Falander was sitting at one of the tables, calm and
indifferent, as if he were prepared for the worst. He
was not surprised to hear that Rehnhjelm had been
engaged, although this news considerably increased
his gloom.</p>

<p>"And what did you think of the manager?" he
asked.</p>

<p>"I wanted to box his ears, but I hadn't the
courage."</p>

<p>"Nor has the management, and therefore he rules
autocratically&mdash;brutality always rules! Perhaps you
know that he is a playwright as well as all the rest?" <span class="pagenum">[175]</span></p>

<p>"I've heard about it."</p>

<p>"He writes a sort of historical play which is always
successful. The reason is that he writes parts instead
of creating characters; he manipulates the applause
at the exits and trades on so-called patriotism. His
characters never talk, they quarrel; men and women,
old and young, all of them; for this reason his
popular piece, <i>The Sons of King Gustavus</i>, is
rightly called a historical quarrel in five acts; it
contains no action, nothing but quarrels: family rows,
street brawls, scenes in Parliament, and so on.
Questions are answered by sly cuts, which do not
provoke scenes, but the most terrible scuffles. There
is no dialogue, nothing but squabbling, in which the
characters insult each other, and the highest dramatic
effect is attained by blows. The critics call his
characterisation great. What has he made of
Gustavus Vasa in the play I just mentioned? A
broad-shouldered, long-bearded, bragging, untenable
fellow of enormous strength; at the meeting of
Parliament at Västeros, he breaks a table with his
fist, and at Vadstena he kicks a door panel to pieces.
On one occasion however the critics said there was
no meaning in his plays; it made him angry, and
he resolved to write comedies with plenty of meaning.
He had a boy at school&mdash;the blackguard's married&mdash;who
had been playing pranks and got a thrashing.
Immediately his father wrote a comedy in which he
drew the masters and exposed the inhuman treatment
boys receive at school in these days. On
another occasion he was criticized by an honest
reviewer, and immediately he wrote a comedy,
libelling the liberal journalists of the town. But
I'll say no more about him!"</p>

<p>"Why does he hate you?"</p>

<p>"Because I said, at a rehearsal, Don Pasquale, in
spite of his maintaining that the proper pronunciation
was Pascal. Result: I was ordered, on penalty
of a fine, to pronounce the word in <i>his</i> way. It was
immaterial to him, he said, how the rest of the world<span class="pagenum">[176]</span>
pronounced the word, at X-köping it was to be
pronounced Pascal, because it was his wish."</p>

<p>"Where does he come from? What was he
before?"</p>

<p>"Can't you guess that he was a wheelwright?
He'd poison you if he thought you knew it. But let
us change the subject; how do you feel after last
night's revels?"</p>

<p>"Splendid! I quite forgot to thank you!"</p>

<p>"Don't mention it! Are you fond of the girl?
I mean Agnes?"</p>

<p>"Yes, I'm very fond of her."</p>

<p>"And she loves you? That's all right, then!
Take her!"</p>

<p>"What nonsense you talk! We couldn't be
married for a long time!"</p>

<p>"Who told you to be married?"</p>

<p>"What are you driving at?"</p>

<p>"You're eighteen, she's sixteen! You're in love
with each other! If you're agreed, only the most
private detail is wanting."</p>

<p>"I don't understand what you mean! Are you
trying to encourage me to behave like a scoundrel
towards her?"</p>

<p>"I am trying to encourage you to obey the great
voice of nature and snap your fingers at the petty
commands of men. It's only envy if men condemn
your conduct; their much-talked-of morality is
nothing but malice, in a suitable, presentable guise.
Hasn't nature called you for some time to her great
banquet, the delight of the gods and the horror of
society afraid of having to pay alimony?"</p>

<p>"Why don't you advise me to marry her?"</p>

<p>"Because that's quite another thing! One doesn't
bind oneself for life after having spent one evening
together; it doesn't follow that he who has enjoyed
the rapture, must also undergo the pain. Matrimony
is an affair of souls; there can be no question of
this in your case. However, there's no need for me
to spur you on; the inevitable is bound to happen.<span class="pagenum">[177]</span>
Love each other while you're young, before it's too
late; love each other as birds love, without worrying
about how to furnish a home; love as the flowers
of the species Di&oelig;cia."</p>

<p>"You've no right to talk disrespectfully of the
girl. She is good, innocent, and to be pitied, and
whoever denies it is a liar. Have you ever seen more
innocent eyes than hers? Doesn't truth proclaim
itself in the sound of her voice? She is worthy of a
great and pure love, not merely of the passion you
speak of. Don't ever talk to me about her in this
way again. You can tell her that I shall look upon
it as the greatest happiness, the highest honour, to
ask her to marry me when I'm worthy of her."</p>

<p>Falander shook his head so violently that the
snakes on his forehead wriggled.</p>

<p>"Worthy of her? Marriage? What stuff!"</p>

<p>"I mean it!"</p>

<p>"Dreadful! And if I should tell you that the girl
does not only lack all the qualities which you ascribe
to her, but possesses all the reverse ones, you wouldn't
believe me, but would deprive me of your friendship?"</p>

<p>"Yes!"</p>

<p>"The world is so full of lies, that nobody will
believe a man when he speaks the truth."</p>

<p>"How can a man believe you, who have no
morals?"</p>

<p>"That word again! What an extraordinary word
it is! It answers all questions, cuts off all discussions,
excuses all failings&mdash;one's own, not those
of others&mdash;strikes down all adversaries, pleads for
or against a cause, just like a lawyer. For the
moment you have defeated me with it, next time
I shall defeat you. I must be off, I have a lesson at
three! Good-bye, good luck!"</p>

<p>And he left Rehnhjelm to his dinner and his
reflections.<br /><br /></p>



<p>When Falander arrived home, he put on a dressing-gown
and slippers, as if he were expecting no visitors.<span class="pagenum">[178]</span>
But he seemed full of an uncontrollable restlessness.
He walked up and down the room, stopping every
now and then at the window and gazing at the street
from behind the curtain. After a while he stopped before
the looking-glass, took his collar off and laid it on
the sofa table. For a few more minutes he continued
his promenade, but suddenly, coming to a standstill
before a card-tray, he took up the photograph of a
lady, placed it under a strong magnifying glass and
examined it as if it were a microscopic slide. He
lingered a long time over his examination.</p>

<p>Presently he heard the sound of footsteps on the
stairs; quickly concealing the photograph in the
place from where he had taken it, he jumped up and
went and sat at his writing-table, turning his back
to the door. He was apparently absorbed in writing
when a knocking&mdash;two short, gentle raps&mdash;broke the
silence.</p>

<p>"Come in," he called, in a voice which was anything
but inviting.</p>

<p>A young girl, small but well-proportioned, entered
the room. She had a delicate, oval face, surrounded
by an aureole of hair which might have been bleached
by the sun, for it was of a less pronounced tint than
the usual natural blond. The constant play of the
small nose and exquisitely cut mouth produced
roguish curves which were incessantly changing, like
the figures in a kaleidoscope; when, for instance,
she moved the wings of her nose, so that the bright
red cartilage showed like the leaf of the liverwort,
her lips fell apart and disclosed the edges of very
small, straight teeth which, although her own, were
too white and even to inspire confidence. Her eyes
were drawn up at the root of the nose and slanted
towards the temples; this gave them a pleading,
pathetic expression, which stood in bewitching
contrast to the lower, roguish parts of her face; she
had restless pupils, small like the point of a needle
at one moment, and distended at the next, like the
objective of a night-telescope.<span class="pagenum">[179]</span></p>

<p>On entering the room, she removed the key from
the lock and shot the bolt.</p>

<p>Falander remained sitting at his table, writing.</p>

<p>"You are late to-day, Agnes," he said.</p>

<p>"Yes, I know," she replied, defiantly, taking off
her hat.</p>

<p>"We were up late last night."</p>

<p>"Why don't you get up and say how do you do to
me? You can't be as tired as all that!"</p>

<p>"I beg your pardon, I forgot all about it!"</p>

<p>"You forgot? I have noticed for some time that
you've been forgetting yourself in many ways."</p>

<p>"Indeed? Since when have you noticed it?"</p>

<p>"Since when? What do you mean? Please
change your dressing-gown and slippers."</p>

<p>"This is the first time you have found me in them,
and you said for some time. Isn't that funny?
Don't you think it is?"</p>

<p>"You are laughing at me! What's the matter
with you? You've been strange for some time."</p>

<p>"For some time? There you are at it again!
Why do you say for some time? Is it because lies
have got to be told? Why should it be necessary
to tell lies?"</p>

<p>"Are you accusing me of telling lies?"</p>

<p>"Oh! no, I'm only teasing you!"</p>

<p>"Do you think I can't see that you are tired of
me? Do you think I didn't see last night how
attentive you were to that stupid Jenny? You
hadn't a word for me!"</p>

<p>"Do you mean to say you're jealous?"</p>

<p>"Jealous! No, my dear, not in the least! If you
prefer her to me, well and good! I don't care a
toss!"</p>

<p>"Really? You're not jealous? Under ordinary
circumstances this would be an unpleasant fact."</p>

<p>"Under ordinary circumstances? What do you
mean by that?"</p>

<p>"I mean&mdash;quite plainly&mdash;that I'm tired of you, as
you just suggested." <span class="pagenum">[180]</span></p>

<p>"It's a lie! You're not!"</p>

<p>The wings of her nose trembled, she showed her
teeth and stabbed him with the needles.</p>

<p>"Let's talk of something else," he said. "What
do you think of Rehnhjelm?"</p>

<p>"I like him very much! He's a dear boy!"</p>

<p>"He's fallen in love with you!"</p>

<p>"Nonsense!"</p>

<p>"And the worst of it is he wants to marry you!"</p>

<p>"Please spare me these inanities!"</p>

<p>"But as he's not twenty, he's going to wait until
he's worthy of you, so he said."</p>

<p>"The little idiot!"</p>

<p>"By worthy he means when he's made a name as
an actor. And he can't succeed in that until he's
allowed to play parts. Can't you manage it for
him?"</p>

<p>Agnes blushed, threw herself back on the sofa
cushions and exhibited a pair of elegant little boots
with gold tassels.</p>

<p>"I? I can't manage it for myself! You're
making fun of me!"</p>

<p>"Yes, I am!"</p>

<p>"You're a friend, Gustav, you really are!"</p>

<p>"Perhaps I am, perhaps I'm not. It's difficult to
say. But as a sensible girl...."</p>

<p>"Oh! shut up!"</p>

<p>She took up a keen-edged paper knife and
threatened him in fun, but it looked very much as
if she were in earnest.</p>

<p>"You are very beautiful to-day, Agnes," said
Falander.</p>

<p>"To-day? Why to-day? Has it never struck
you before?"</p>

<p>"Of course it has!"</p>

<p>"Why are you sighing?"</p>

<p>"Too much drink last night!"</p>

<p>"Let me look at you! What's the matter with
your eyes?"</p>

<p>"No sleep last night, my dear!" <span class="pagenum">[181]</span></p>

<p>"I'll go, then you can take a nap."</p>

<p>"Don't go! I can't sleep anyhow!"</p>

<p>"I must be off! I really only came to tell you
that."</p>

<p>Her voice softened; her eyelids dropped slowly,
like the curtain after a death scene.</p>

<p>"It was kind of you to come and tell me that it's
all over," said Falander.</p>

<p>She rose and pinned on her hat before the glass.</p>

<p>"Have you any scent?" she asked.</p>

<p>"Not here; at the theatre."</p>

<p>"You should stop smoking a pipe; the smell
hangs about one's clothes."</p>

<p>"I will."</p>

<p>She stooped and fastened her garter.</p>

<p>"I beg your pardon," she said, looking at Falander,
pleadingly.</p>

<p>"What for?" he asked, absent-mindedly.</p>

<p>As she made no reply, he took courage and drew a
deep breath.</p>

<p>"Where are you going?" he said.</p>

<p>"To be fitted for a dress; you needn't be afraid,"
she replied, innocently, as she thought.</p>

<p>Falander could easily tell that it was an excuse.</p>

<p>"Good-bye, then," he said.</p>

<p>She went to him to be kissed. He took her in his
arms and pressed her against him as if he wanted to
crush her; then he kissed her on the forehead, led
her to the door, pushed her outside, and said briefly:
"Good-bye!" <span class="pagenum">[182]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XVI" id="CHAPTER_XVI"></a>CHAPTER XVI</h2>

<h3>IN THE WHITE MOUNTAINS</h3>


<p>One afternoon in August, Falk was again sitting in
the garden on Moses Height; but he was alone,
and he had been alone during the whole summer.
He was turning over in his mind all that had happened
to him during the three months which had passed
since his last visit, when his heart was brimful of
hope, courage, and strength. He felt old, tired,
indifferent; he had seen the houses at his feet from
the inside, and on every occasion his expectations
had been disappointed. He had seen humanity under
many aspects, aspects which are only revealed to
the eye of the poor man's doctor or the journalist,
with the only difference that the journalist generally
sees men as they wish to appear, and the doctor as
they are. He had every opportunity of studying
man as a social animal in all possible guises; he
had been present at Parliamentary meetings, church
councils, general meetings of shareholders, philanthropic
meetings, police court proceedings, festivals,
funerals, public meetings of working men; everywhere
he had heard big words and many words,
words never used in daily intercourse, a particular
species of words which mean nothing, at least not
what they ought to mean. This had given him a
one-sided conception of humanity; he could see in
man nothing but the deceitful social animal, a
creature he is bound to be because civilization forbids
open war. His aloofness blinded him to the existence
of another animal, an animal which "between glass
and wall" is exceedingly amiable, as long as it is<span class="pagenum">[183]</span>
not exasperated, and which is ready to come out
with all its failings and weaknesses when there are
no witnesses. He was blind to it and that was the
reason why he had become embittered.</p>

<p>But the worst of it all was he had lost his self-respect.
And that had happened without his having
committed a single action of which he need have been
ashamed. He had been robbed of it by his fellow-creatures,
and it had not been a very difficult thing
to do. He had been slighted everywhere, and how
could he, whose self-confidence had been destroyed
in his early youth, respect a person whom everybody
despised? With many a bitter pang he saw
that all Conservative journalists, that was to say
men who defended and upheld everything that was
wrong&mdash;or if they could not defend it, at least left
it untouched&mdash;were treated with the utmost courtesy.
He was despised, not so much as a pressman as in
his character of advocate of all those who were down-trodden
and hardly dealt with.</p>

<p>He had lived through times of cruel doubt. For
instance: in reporting the General Meeting of
Shareholders of the Marine Insurance Society
"Triton," he had used the word swindle. In replying
to his report, the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> had published a long
article proving so clearly that the society was a
national, patriotic, philanthropic institution that
he had almost felt convinced of having been wrong,
and the thought of having recklessly played with the
reputation of his fellow citizens was a nightmare
to him for many days to come.</p>

<p>He was now in a state of mind which alternated
between fanaticism and callousness; his next impulse
would decide the direction his development was
to take.</p>

<p>His life had been so dreary during the summer that
he welcomed with malicious pleasure every rainy day,
and it was a comparatively pleasant sensation to
watch leaves rustling along the garden paths.</p>

<p>He sat absorbed in grimly humorous meditations<span class="pagenum">[184]</span>
on life and its purposes, when one lean, bony hand
was laid on his shoulder, and another clutched his
arm; he felt as if death had come to take him at his
word. He looked up and started: before him stood
Ygberg, pale as a corpse, emaciated and looking at
him with those peculiarly washed out eyes which
only starvation produces.</p>

<p>"Good morning, Falk," he whispered, almost
inaudibly, and his whole body seemed to rattle.</p>

<p>"Good morning, Ygberg," replied Falk, suddenly
brightening up. "Sit down and have a cup of
coffee! How are you? You look as if you had
been lying under the ice."</p>

<p>"Oh! I've been so ill, so ill!"</p>

<p>"You seem to have had as jolly a summer as I
had!"</p>

<p>"Have you had a hard time, too?" asked Ygberg,
a faint hope that it had been the case brightening his
yellow face.</p>

<p>"I can only say: Thank God that the cursed
summer is over! It might be winter all the year
round for all I care! Not only that one is suffering
all the time, but one also has to watch others enjoying
themselves! I never put a foot out of town; did
you?"</p>

<p>"I haven't seen a pine tree since Lundell left Lill-Jans
in June! And why should one want to see
pine trees? It isn't absolutely essential; nor is a
pine tree anything extraordinary! But that one can't
have the pleasure, that's where the sting comes in."</p>

<p>"Oh, well! Never mind! It's clouding over
in the east, therefore it will rain to-morrow; and
when the sun shines again, it will be autumn. Your
health!"</p>

<p>Ygberg looked at the punch as if it were poison,
but he drank it nevertheless.</p>

<p>"But you wrote that beautiful story of the guardian
angel, or the Marine Insurance Society 'Triton,'
for Smith," remarked Falk. "Didn't it go against
your convictions?" <span class="pagenum">[185]</span></p>

<p>"Convictions? I have no convictions."</p>

<p>"Haven't you?"</p>

<p>"No, only fools have convictions."</p>

<p>"Have you no morals, Ygberg?"</p>

<p>"No! Whenever a fool has an idea&mdash;it comes
to the same thing whether it is original or not&mdash;he
calls it his conviction, clings to it and boasts of it,
not because it is <i>a</i> conviction, but because it is <i>his</i>
conviction. So far as the Marine Insurance Society
is concerned, I believe it's a swindle! I'm sure it
injures many men, the shareholders at all events, but
it's a splendid thing for others, the directors and
employés, for instance; so it does a fair amount
of good, after all."</p>

<p>"Have you lost all sense of honour, old friend?"</p>

<p>"One must sacrifice everything on the altar of
duty."</p>

<p>"I admit that."</p>

<p>"The first and foremost duty of man is to live&mdash;to
live at any price! Divine as well as human law
demands it."</p>

<p>"One must never sacrifice honour."</p>

<p>"Both laws, as I said, demand the sacrifice of
everything&mdash;they compel a poor man to sacrifice
his so-called honour. It's cruel, but you can't blame
the poor man for it."</p>

<p>"Your theory of life is anything but cheerful."</p>

<p>"How could it be otherwise?"</p>

<p>"That's true!"</p>

<p>"But to talk of something else: I've had a letter
from Rehnhjelm. I'll read it to you, if you like."</p>

<p>"I heard he had gone on the stage."</p>

<p>"Yes, and he doesn't seem to be having a good time
of it."</p>

<p>Ygberg took a letter from his breast-pocket, put
a piece of sugar into his mouth and began to read.</p>

<p>"If there is a hell in a life after this, which is very
doubtful...."</p>

<p>"The lad's become a free-thinker!"</p>

<p>"It cannot be a worse place than this. I've been<span class="pagenum">[186]</span>
engaged for two months, but it seems to me like two
years. A devil, formerly a wheelwright, now
theatrical manager, holds my fate in his hand, and
treats me in such a way that three times a day I feel
tempted to run away. But he has so carefully
drafted the penal clauses in the agreement, that my
flight would dishonour my parents' name.</p>

<p>"I have <i>walked on</i> every single night, but I've
never been allowed to open my lips yet. For twenty
consecutive evenings I have had to smear my face
with umber and wear a gipsy's costume, not a single
piece of which fits me; the tights are too long, the
shoes too large, the jacket is too short. An under-devil,
called the prompter, takes good care that I
don't exchange my costume for one more suitable;
and whenever I try to hide myself behind the crowd,
which is made up of the director-manufacturer's
factory hands, it opens and pushes me forward to the
footlights. If I look into the wings, my eyes fall on
the under-devil, standing there, grinning, and if I
look at the house, I see Satan himself sitting in a
box, laughing.</p>

<p>"I seem to have been engaged for his amusement,
not for the purpose of playing any parts. On one
occasion I ventured to draw his attention to the fact
that I ought to have practice in speaking parts if
I was ever going to be an actor. He lost his temper
and said that one must learn to crawl before one can
learn to walk. I replied that I could walk. He said
it was a lie and asked me whether I imagined that
the art of acting, the most beautiful and difficult
of all arts, required no training. When I said
that that was exactly what I did imagine, and
that I was impatiently waiting for the beginning of
my training, he told me I was an ignorant puppy,
and he would kick me out. When I remonstrated,
he asked me whether I looked upon the stage as a
refuge for impecunious youths. My reply was a
frank, unconditional glad Yes. He roared that he
would kill me.<span class="pagenum">[187]</span></p>

<p>"This is the present state of my affairs.</p>

<p>"I feel that my soul is flickering out like a tallow
candle in a draught, and I shall soon believe that
'Evil will be victorious, even though it be concealed
in clouds,' as the Catechism has it.</p>

<p>"But the worst of all is that I have lost all respect
for this art, which was the dream and the love of my
boyhood. Can I help it when I see that men and
women without education or culture, spurred on
by vanity and recklessness, completely lacking in
enthusiasm and intelligence are able to play in a few
months' time character parts, historical parts, fairly
well, without having a glimmer of knowledge of the
time in which they move, or the important part which
the person they represent played in history?</p>

<p>"It is slow murder, and the association with this
mob which keeps me down&mdash;some of the members
of the company have come into collision with various
paragraphs of the penal code&mdash;is making of me
what I've never been, an aristocrat. The pressure
of the cultured can never weigh as heavily on the
uncultured.</p>

<p>"There is but one ray of light in this darkness: I
am in love. She is purest gold among all this dross.
Of course she, too, is persecuted and slowly murdered,
just as I am, since she refused the stage-manager's
infamous proposals. She is the only woman with a
living spirit among all these beasts, wallowing in
filth, and she loves me with all her soul. We are
secretly engaged. I am only waiting for the day
when I shall have won success, to make her my wife.
But when will that be? We have often thought of
dying together, but hope, treacherous hope, has
always beguiled us into continuing this misery. To
see my innocent love burning with shame when she is
forced to wear improper costumes, is more than I
can bear. But I will drop this unpleasant subject.</p>

<p>"Olle and Lundell wish to be remembered. Olle
is very much changed. He has drifted into a new
kind of philosophy, which tears down everything<span class="pagenum">[188]</span>
and turns all things upside down. It sounds very jolly
and sometimes seems true, but it must be a dangerous
doctrine if carried out.</p>

<p>"I believe he owes these ideas to one of the actors
here, an intelligent and well-informed man, who lives
a very immoral life; I like and hate him at the same
time. He is a queer chap, fundamentally good,
noble and generous; a man who will sacrifice himself
for his friends. I cannot fix on any special vice,
but he is immoral, and a man without morality is a
blackguard&mdash;don't you think so?</p>

<p>"I must stop, my angel, my good spirit is coming.
There is a happy hour in store for me; all evil spirits
will flee, and I shall be a better man.</p>

<p>"Remember me to Falk and tell him to think of
me when life is hard on him.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
"Your friend R."<br />
</div>

<p>"Well, what do you think of that?"</p>

<p>"It's the old story of the struggle of the wild
beasts. I'll tell you what, Ygberg, I believe one
has to be very unscrupulous if one wants to get on
in the world."</p>

<p>"Try it! You may not find it so easy!"</p>

<p>"Are you still doing business with Smith?"</p>

<p>"No, unfortunately not! And you?"</p>

<p>"I've seen him on the subject of my poems. He
has bought them, ten crowns the folio, and he can
now murder me in the same way as the wheelwright
is murdering Rehnhjelm. And I'm afraid something
of the sort is going to happen, for I haven't
heard a word about them. He was so exceedingly
friendly that I expect the worst. If only I knew
what's going on! But what's the matter with you?
You're as white as a sheet."</p>

<p>"The truth is," replied Ygberg, clutching the
railings, "all I've had to eat these last two days has
been five lumps of sugar. I'm afraid I'm going to faint."</p>

<p>"If food will set you right, I can help you; fortunately
I have some money." <span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_189" id="Page_189">[189]</a></span></p>

<p>"Of course it will set me right," whispered Ygberg
faintly.</p>

<p>But it was not so. When they were sitting in the
dining-room and food was served to them, Ygberg
grew worse, and Falk had to take him to his room,
which fortunately was not very far off.<br /><br /></p>



<p>The house was an old, one-story house built of
wood; it had climbed on to a rock and looked as if
it suffered from hip-disease. It was spotted like
a leper; a long time ago it was going to be painted,
but when the old paint had been burned off, nothing
more was done to it; it looked in every respect
miserable, and it was hard to believe the legend of
the sign of the Fire Insurance Office, rusting on the
wall, namely, that a ph&oelig;nix should rise from the
ashes.</p>

<p>At the base of the house grew dandelions, nettles,
and roadweed, the faithful companions of poverty;
sparrows were bathing in the scorching sand and
scattering it about; pale-faced children with big
stomachs, looking as if they were being brought up
on 90 per cent. of water, were making dandelion
chains and trying to embitter their sad lives by
annoying and insulting each other.</p>

<p>Falk and Ygberg climbed a rotten, creaking staircase
and came to a large room. It was divided into
three parts by chalk lines. The first and second
divisions served a joiner and a cobbler as workshops;
the third was exclusively devoted to the more intimate
pursuits of family life.</p>

<p>Whenever the children screamed, which happened
once in every quarter of an hour, the joiner flew into
a rage and burst out scolding and swearing; the
cobbler remonstrated with quotations from the
Bible. The joiner's nerves were so shattered by these
constant screams, the unceasing punishments and
scoldings, that five minutes after partaking of the
snuff of reconciliation offered by the cobbler, he flew
into a fresh temper in spite of his firm resolve to be<span class="pagenum">[190]</span>
patient. Consequently he was nearly all day long
in a red-hot fury. But the worst passages were
when he asked the woman, "why these infernal
females need bring so many children into the world;"
then the woman in question came on the tapis and his
antagonist gave him as good as he brought.</p>

<p>Falk and Ygberg had to pass this room to gain
the latter's garret, and although both of them went
on tiptoe, they wakened two of the children; immediately
the mother began humming a lullaby, thereby
interrupting a discussion between cobbler and joiner;
naturally the latter nearly had a fit.</p>

<p>"Hold your tongue, woman!"</p>

<p>"Hold your tongue yourself! Can't you let the
children sleep?"</p>

<p>"To hell with the children! Are they my children?
Am I to suffer for other people's immorality? Am
I an immoral man? What? Have I any children?
Hold your tongue, I say, or I'll throw my plane at
your head."</p>

<p>"I say, master, master!" began the cobbler;
"you shouldn't talk like that of the children; God
sends the little ones into the world."</p>

<p>"That's a lie, cobbler! The devil sends them!
The devil! And then the dissolute parents blame
God! You ought to be ashamed of yourselves!"</p>

<p>"Master, master! You shouldn't use such language!
Scripture tells us that the kingdom of heaven
belongs to the children."</p>

<p>"Oh, indeed! They have them in the kingdom
of heaven, have they?"</p>

<p>"How dare you talk like that!" shrilled the
furious mother. "If you ever have any children
of your own, I shall pray that they may be lame
and diseased; I shall pray that they shall be blind
and deaf and dumb; I shall pray that they shall be
sent to the reformatory and end on the gallows; see
if I won't."</p>

<p>"Do so for all I care, you good-for-nothing hussy!
I'm not going to bring children into the world to<span class="pagenum">[191]</span>
see them living a dog's life. You ought to be sent
to the House of Correction, for bringing the poor
things into all this misery. You are married, you
say? Well! Need you be immoral because you are
married?"</p>

<p>"Master, master! God sends the children."</p>

<p>"It's a lie, cobbler! I read in a paper the other
day that the damned potato is to blame for the
large families of the poor; don't you see, the potato
consists of two substances, called oxygen and nitrogen;
whenever these substances occur in a certain quantity
and proportion, women become prolific."</p>

<p>"But what is one to do?" asked the angry
mother, whom this interesting explanation had
calmed down a little.</p>

<p>"One shouldn't eat potatoes; can't you see
that?"</p>

<p>"But what is one to eat if not potatoes?"</p>

<p>"Beef-steak, woman! Steak and onions! What!
Isn't that good? Or steak à la Châteaubriand!
Do you know what that is? What? I saw in
the 'Fatherland' the other day that a woman who
had taken womb-grain very nearly died as well as
the baby."</p>

<p>"What's that?" asked the mother, pricking up
her ears.</p>

<p>"You'd like to know, would you?"</p>

<p>"Is it true what you just said about womb-grain?"
asked the cobbler, blinking his eyes.</p>

<p>"Hoho! That brings up your lungs and liver,
but there's a heavy penalty on it, and that's as it
should be."</p>

<p>"Is it as it should be?" asked the cobbler dully.</p>

<p>"Of course it is! Immorality must be punished;
and it's immoral to murder one's children."</p>

<p>"Children! Surely, there's a difference," replied
the angry mother, resignedly; "but where does the
stuff you just spoke about come from, master?"</p>

<p>"Haha! You want more children, you hussy,
although you are a widow with five! Beware of that<span class="pagenum">[192]</span>
devil of a cobbler! He's hard on women, in spite of
his piety. A pinch of snuff, cobbler?"</p>

<p>"There is really a herb then...."</p>

<p>"Who said it was a herb? Did I say so? No;
it's an organic substance. Let me tell you, all
substances&mdash;nature contains about sixty&mdash;are divided
into organic and inorganic substances. This one's
Latin name is cornuticus secalias; it comes from
abroad, for instance from the Calabrian Peninsula."</p>

<p>"Is it very expensive, master?" asked the
cobbler.</p>

<p>"Expensive!" ejaculated the joiner, manipulating
his plane as if it were a carbine. "It's awfully
expensive!"</p>

<p>Falk had listened to the conversation with great
interest. Now he started; he had heard a carriage
stopping underneath the window, and the sound of
two women's voices which seemed familiar to him.</p>

<p>"This house looks all right."</p>

<p>"Does it?" said an older voice. "I think it looks
dreadful."</p>

<p>"I meant it looks all right for our purpose. Do
you know, driver, whether any poor people are
living in this house?"</p>

<p>"I don't know," replied the driver, "but I'd
stake my oath on it."</p>

<p>"Swearing is a sin, so you had better not. Wait
for us here, while we go upstairs to do our duty."</p>

<p>"I say, Eugenia, hadn't we better first talk a
little to the children down here?" said Mrs. Homan
to Mrs. Falk, lagging behind.</p>

<p>"Perhaps it would be just as well. Come here,
little boy! What's your name?"</p>

<p>"Albert," answered a pale-faced little lad of six.</p>

<p>"Do you know Jesus, my laddie?"</p>

<p>"No," answered the child with a laugh, and put
a finger into his mouth.</p>

<p>"Terrible!" said Mrs. Falk, taking out her note-book.
"I'd better say: Parish of St. Catherine's.
White Mountains. Profound spiritual darkness in<span class="pagenum">[193]</span>
the minds of the young. I suppose darkness is the
right word?" She turned to the little fellow:
"And don't you want to know him?"</p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>"Would you like a penny?"</p>

<p>"Yes!"</p>

<p>"You should say please! Indescribably neglected,
but I succeeded, by gentleness, in awakening their
better feelings."</p>

<p>"What a horrible smell! Let's go, Eugenia,"
implored Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>They went upstairs and entered the large room
without knocking.</p>

<p>The joiner seized his plane and began planing
a knotty board, so that the ladies had to shout to
make themselves heard.</p>

<p>"Is anybody here thirsting for salvation?"
shouted Mrs. Homan, while Mrs. Falk worked her
scent-spray so vigorously that the children began to
cry with the smarting of their eyes.</p>

<p>"Are you offering us salvation, lady?" asked the
joiner, interrupting his work. "Where did you get
it from? Perhaps there's charity to be had, too,
and humiliation and pride?"</p>

<p>"You are a ruffian; you will be damned," answered
Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>Mrs. Falk made notes in her note-book. "He's
all right," she remarked.</p>

<p>"Is there anything else you'd like to say?"
asked Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>"We know the sort you are! Perhaps you'd like
to talk to me about religion, ladies? I can talk
on any subject. Have you ever heard anything
about the councils held at Nicæa, or the Smalcaldic
Articles?"</p>

<p>"We know nothing about that, my good man."</p>

<p>"Why do you call me good? Scripture says
nobody is good but God alone. So you know nothing
about the Nicene Council, ladies? How can you dare
to teach others, when you know nothing yourselves?<span class="pagenum">[194]</span>
And if you want to dispense charity, do it while
I turn my back to you, for true charity is given
secretly. Practise on the children, if you like, they
can't defend themselves; but leave us in peace.
Give us work and pay us a just wage and then you
needn't run about like this. A pinch of snuff,
cobbler!"</p>

<p>"Shall I write: Great unbelief, quite hardened,
Evelyn?" asked Mrs. Falk.</p>

<p>"I should put <i>impenitent</i>, dear."</p>

<p>"What are you writing down, ladies? Our sins?
Surely your book's too small for that!"</p>

<p>"The outcome of the so-called working men's
unions...."</p>

<p>"Very good," said Mrs. Homan.</p>

<p>"Beware of the working men's unions," said the
joiner. "For hundreds of years war has been
made upon the kings, but now we've discovered that
the kings are not to blame. The next campaign
will be against all idlers who live on the work of
others; then we shall see something."</p>

<p>"That's enough!" said the cobbler.</p>

<p>The angry mother, whose eyes had been riveted
on Mrs. Falk during the whole scene, took the opportunity
of putting in a word.</p>

<p>"Excuse me, but aren't you Mrs. Falk?" she
asked.</p>

<p>"No," answered that lady with an assurance which
took even Mrs. Homan's breath away.</p>

<p>"But you're as like her as its possible to be! I
knew her father, Ronock, who's now on the flagship."</p>

<p>"That's all very nice, but it doesn't concern
us.... Are there any other people in this house
who need salvation?"</p>

<p>"No," said the joiner, "they don't need salvation,
they need food and clothes, or, better still, work;
much work and well-paid work. But the ladies had
better not go and see them, for one of them is down
with small-pox...."</p>

<p>"Small-pox!" screamed Mrs. Homan, "and<span class="pagenum">[195]</span>
nobody said a word about it! Come along Eugenia,
let's at once inform the police! What a disgusting
set of people they are!"</p>

<p>"But the children? Whose children are these?
Answer!" said Mrs. Falk, holding up her pencil,
threateningly.</p>

<p>"They're mine, lady," answered the mother.</p>

<p>"But your husband? Where's your husband?"</p>

<p>"Disappeared!" said the joiner.</p>

<p>"We'll set the police on his track! He shall
be sent to the Penitentiary. Things must be changed
here! I said it was a good house, Evelyn."</p>

<p>"Won't the ladies sit down?" asked the joiner.
"It's so much easier to keep up a conversation sitting
down. We've no chairs, but that doesn't matter;
we've no beds either; they went for taxes, for the
lighting of the street, so that you need not go home
from the theatre in the dark. We've no gas, as you
can see for yourselves. They went in payment of
the water-rate&mdash;so that your servants should be
saved running up and down stairs; the water's
not laid on here. They went towards the keeping
up of the hospitals, so that your sons will not be laid
up at home when...."</p>

<p>"Come away, Eugenia, for God's sake! This is
unbearable!"</p>

<p>"I agree with you, ladies, it is unbearable," said
the joiner. "And the day will come when things
will be worse; on that day we shall come down from
the White Mountains with a great noise, like a waterfall,
and ask for the return of our beds. Ask? We
shall take them! And you shall lie on wooden benches,
as I've had to do, and eat potatoes until your stomachs
are as tight as a drum and you feel as if you had
undergone the torture by water, as we...."</p>

<p>But the ladies had fled, leaving behind them a pile
of pamphlets.</p>

<p>"Ugh! What a beastly smell of eau-de-Cologne!
It smells of prostitutes!" said the joiner. "A pinch
of snuff, cobbler!" <span class="pagenum">[196]</span></p>

<p>He wiped his forehead with his blue apron and
took up his plane while the others reflected silently.</p>

<p>Ygberg, who had been asleep during the whole of
the scene, now awoke and made ready to go out
again with Falk. Once more Mrs. Homan's voice
floated through the open window:</p>

<p>"What did she mean when she said your father
was on the flagship? Your father is a captain, isn't
he?"</p>

<p>"That's what he's called. It's the same thing.
Weren't they an insolent crowd? I'll never go there
again. But it will make a fine report. To the
restaurant Hasselbacken, driver!" <span class="pagenum">[197]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XVII" id="CHAPTER_XVII"></a>CHAPTER XVII</h2>

<h3>NATURA....</h3>


<p>Falander was at home studying a part one afternoon,
when he was disturbed by a gentle tapping, two
double-raps, at his door. He jumped up, hastily
donned a coat and opened.</p>

<p>"Agnes! This is a rare visit!"</p>

<p>"I had to come and see you, it's so damned slow!"</p>

<p>"What dreadful language!"</p>

<p>"Let me curse! It relieves my feelings."</p>

<p>"Hm! hm!"</p>

<p>"Give me a cigar; I haven't had a smoke these
last six weeks. This education makes me frantic."</p>

<p>"Is he so severe?"</p>

<p>"Curse him!"</p>

<p>"For shame, Agnes!"</p>

<p>"I've been forbidden to smoke, to curse, to drink
punch, to go out in the evening! But wait until we
are married! I'll let him see!"</p>

<p>"Is he really serious about it?"</p>

<p>"Absolutely! Look at this handkerchief!"</p>

<p>"A. R. with a crown and nine balls."</p>

<p>"Our initials are the same and he's making me
use his design. Isn't it lovely?"</p>

<p>"Yes, very nice. It's gone as far as that, has it?"</p>

<p>The angel, dressed in blue, threw herself on the
sofa and puffed at her cigar. Falander looked at her
body as if he were making an estimate, and said:</p>

<p>"Will you have a glass of punch?"</p>

<p>"Rather!"</p>

<p>"Are you in love with your fiancé?"</p>

<p>"He doesn't belong to the class of men with whom<span class="pagenum">[198]</span>
one can really be in love. But I don't know. Love?
Hm! What is love?"</p>

<p>"Yes, what is it?"</p>

<p>"Oh, you know what I mean. He's very respectable,
awfully respectable, but, but, but...."</p>

<p>"But?"</p>

<p>"He's so proper."</p>

<p>She looked at Falander with a smile which would
have saved the absent fiancé, if he could have seen it.</p>

<p>"He isn't demonstrative enough?" asked Falander
curiously, in an unsteady voice.</p>

<p>She drank her glass of punch, paused, shook her
head, and said with a theatrical sigh:</p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>The reply seemed to satisfy Falander; it obviously
relieved him. He continued his cross-examination.</p>

<p>"It may be a long time before you can get married.
He's never played a single part yet."</p>

<p>"No, I know."</p>

<p>"Won't you find the waiting dull?"</p>

<p>"One must be patient."</p>

<p>I must use the thumbscrew, thought Falander.</p>

<p>"I suppose you know that Jenny and I are
lovers?"</p>

<p>"The ugly, old hag!"</p>

<p>A whole shower of white northern lights flamed
across her face and every muscle twitched, as if she
were under the influence of a galvanic battery.</p>

<p>"She isn't as old as all that," said Falander coldly.
"Have you heard that the waiter Gustav is going to
play Don Diego in the new piece, and that Rehnhjelm
has been given the part of his servant? The waiter
is bound to have a success, for the part plays itself;
but poor Rehnhjelm will die with shame."</p>

<p>"Good heavens! Is it true?"</p>

<p>"It's true enough."</p>

<p>"It shan't happen!"</p>

<p>"Who's to prevent it?"</p>

<p>She jumped up from the sofa, emptied her glass and
began to sob wildly.<span class="pagenum">[199]</span></p>

<p>"Oh! How bitter the world is, how bitter!" she
sobbed. "It's just as if an evil power were spying on
us, finding out our wishes, merely to cross them;
discerning our hopes, so as to shatter them; anticipating
our thoughts so as to paralyse them. If it were
possible to long for evil to happen to oneself, one
ought to do it just for the sake of making a fool of that
power."</p>

<p>"Quite true, my dear; therefore one should always
be prepared for a bad ending. But that's not the
worst. I'll give you a thought which will comfort
you. You know that every success you attain entails
someone else's failure; if you are given a part to
play, some other woman is disappointed; it makes
her writhe like a worm trodden under foot, and without
knowing it you have committed a wrong; therefore,
even happiness is poisoned. Be comforted in
misfortune by the thought that every piece of ill-luck
which falls to your share is equivalent to a good
action, even though it be a good action committed
without your knowing it; and the thought of a good
action is the only pure enjoyment which is given to us
mortals."</p>

<p>"I don't want to do any good actions! I don't
want any pure joys! I have the same right to
success as everybody else! And I&mdash;will&mdash;be successful!"</p>

<p>"At any price?"</p>

<p>"I won't play your mistress's maid at any price."</p>

<p>"You're jealous! Learn to bear failure gracefully!
That's greater&mdash;and much more interesting."</p>

<p>"Tell me one thing! Is she in love with you?"</p>

<p>"I'm afraid she loves me only too well."</p>

<p>"And you?"</p>

<p>"I? I shall never love any woman but you!"</p>

<p>He seized her hand.</p>

<p>She jumped up from the sofa, showing her stockings.</p>

<p>"Do you believe in what is called love?" she
asked, gazing at him with distended pupils.</p>

<p>"I believe there are several kinds of love." <span class="pagenum">[200]</span></p>

<p>She crossed the room towards the door.</p>

<p>"Do you love me wholly and entirely?" She
put her hand on the door-handle.</p>

<p>He pondered for two seconds. Then he replied:</p>

<p>"Your soul is evil, and I don't love evil."</p>

<p>"I don't care a fig for my soul! Do you love me?
Me?"</p>

<p>"Yes! So deeply...."</p>

<p>"Why did you send me Rehnhjelm?"</p>

<p>"Because I wanted to find out what life without
you would be like."</p>

<p>"Did you lie when you said you were tired of me?"</p>

<p>"Yes, I lied."</p>

<p>"Oh! You old devil!"</p>

<p>She took the key out of the lock and he drew down
the blind.<span class="pagenum">[201]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XVIII" id="CHAPTER_XVIII"></a>CHAPTER XVIII</h2>

<h3>NIHILISM</h3>


<p>As Falk was walking home one rainy September
evening and turning into Count-Magni-Street, he saw
to his amazement that his windows were lit up.
When he was near enough to be able to cast a glance
into his room from below, he noticed on the ceiling
the shadow of a man which seemed familiar, although
he could not place it. It was a despondent-looking
shadow, and the nearer he came the more despondent
it looked.</p>

<p>On entering his room he saw Struve sitting at his
writing-table with his head on his hands. His
clothes were soaked with rain and clung heavily to his
body; there were little puddles on the floor which
slowly drained off through the chinks. His hair hung
in damp strands from his head, and his usually English
whiskers fell like stalactites on his damp coat collar.
He had placed his black hat beside him on the table;
it had collapsed under its own weight, and the wide
crape band which it was wearing suggested that it
was mourning for its lost youth.</p>

<p>"Good evening," said Falk. "This is an unexpected
honour."</p>

<p>"Don't jeer at me," begged Struve.</p>

<p>"And why not? I see no reason why I should
spare you."</p>

<p>"I see! You're done!"</p>

<p>"Yes! I shall turn Conservative too, before long.
You're in mourning, I see; I hope I may congratulate
you."</p>

<p>"I've lost a little son." <span class="pagenum">[202]</span></p>

<p>"Then I'll congratulate him! But what do you
want here? You know I despise you! I expect
you do yourself. Don't you?"</p>

<p>"Of course I do! But isn't life bitter enough
without our unnecessarily embittering it still further?
If God, or Providence, is amused at it, need it follow
that man should equally degrade himself?"</p>

<p>"That sounds reasonable and does you honour.
Won't you put on my dressing-gown while you are
drying your clothes? You must be cold."</p>

<p>"Thank you! But I mustn't stay."</p>

<p>"Oh! Stay a little while! It will give us a chance
of having things out."</p>

<p>"I don't like talking about my misfortunes."</p>

<p>"Then talk about your crimes!"</p>

<p>"I haven't committed any!"</p>

<p>"Oh, yes, you have! You have committed great
crimes! You have put your heavy hand on the
oppressed; you have kicked the wounded; you have
sneered at the wretched. Do you remember the last
strike when you were on the side of power?"</p>

<p>"The side of the law, brother!"</p>

<p>"Haha! The law! Who has dictated the law
which governs the life of the poor man, you fool!
The rich man! That is to say, the master made the
law for the slave."</p>

<p>"The law was dictated by the whole nation and the
universal sense of right. God gave the law."</p>

<p>"Save your big words when you talk to me. Who
wrote the law of 1734? Mr. Kronstedt! Who is
responsible for the law of corporal punishment?
Colonel Sabelman&mdash;it was his Bill, and his friends, who
formed the majority at that time, pushed it through.
Colonel Sabelman is not the nation and his friends are
not the universal sense of right. Who is responsible
for the law concerning joint stock companies? Judge
Svindelgren. Who is responsible for the new Parliamentary
laws? Assessor Vallonius. Who has
written the law of 'legal protection,' that is to say
the protection of the rich from the just claims of the<span class="pagenum">[203]</span>
poor? Wholesale merchant grocer. Don't talk to
me! I know your claptrap. Who has written the
new law of succession? Criminals! The forest
laws? Thieves! The law relating to bills of private
banks? Swindlers! And you maintain that God
has done it? Poor God!"</p>

<p>"May I give you a piece of advice, bought with my
own experience, advice which will be useful to you all
your life? If you want to escape self-immolation, a
fate which in your fanaticism you are fast approaching,
change your point of view as soon as possible.
Take a bird's-eye view of the world, and you will see
how small and insignificant everything is. Start with
the conviction that the whole world is a rubbish heap;
that men are the refuse, no better than egg-shells,
carrot stalks, cabbage leaves, rags; then nothing will
take you by surprise, you will never lose an illusion;
but, on the contrary, you will be filled with a great
joy whenever you come across a fine thought, a good
action; try to acquire a calm contempt of the world&mdash;you
needn't be afraid of growing callous."</p>

<p>"I have not yet attained to that point of view, it's
true, but I have a contempt for the world. But that
is my misfortune; for directly I hear of a single act of
generosity or kindness, I love humanity again, and
overrate my fellowmen, only to be deceived afresh."</p>

<p>"Be more selfish! Let the devil take your fellowmen!"</p>

<p>"I'm afraid I can't."</p>

<p>"Try another profession; join your brother; he
seems to get on in this world. I saw him yesterday
at the church council of the Parish of St. Nicholas."</p>

<p>"At the church council?"</p>

<p>"Yes; that man has a future. The pastor
primarius nodded to him. He'll soon be an alderman,
like all landed proprietors."</p>

<p>"What about the 'Triton'?"</p>

<p>"They work with debentures now; but your
brother hasn't lost anything by it, even though he
hasn't made anything. No, he's other fish to fry!" <span class="pagenum">[204]</span></p>

<p>"Don't let us talk of that man."</p>

<p>"But he's your brother!"</p>

<p>"That isn't his merit! But now tell me what you
want."</p>

<p>"My boy's funeral is to-morrow, and I have no
dress-coat...."</p>

<p>"I'll lend you mine."</p>

<p>"Thank you, brother. You're extricating me
from an awkward position. That was one thing, but
there is something else, of a rather more delicate
nature...."</p>

<p>"Why come to me, your enemy, with your delicate
confidences? I'm surprised...."</p>

<p>"Because you are a man of heart."</p>

<p>"Don't build on that any longer! But go on."</p>

<p>"How irritable you've grown! You're not the
same man; you used to be so gentle."</p>

<p>"We discussed that before! Speak up!"</p>

<p>"I want to ask you whether you would come with
me to the churchyard."</p>

<p>"I? Why don't you ask one of your colleagues
from the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>?"</p>

<p>"There are reasons. I don't see why I shouldn't
tell you. I'm not married."</p>

<p>"Not married! You! The defender of religion
and morality, have broken the sacred bonds!"</p>

<p>"Poverty, the force of circumstances! But I'm
just as happy as if I were married! I love my
wife and she loves me, and that's all. But there's
another reason. The child has not been baptized;
it was three weeks old when it died, and therefore no
clergyman will bury it. I don't dare to tell this to
my wife, because she would fret. I've told her the
clergyman would meet us in the churchyard; I'm
telling you this to prevent a possible scene. She, of
course, will remain at home. You'll only meet two
other fellows; one of them, Levi, is a younger brother
of the director of the 'Triton,' and one of the employés
of that society. He's a decent sort, with an unusually
good head and a still better heart. Don't laugh, I can<span class="pagenum">[205]</span>
see that you think I've borrowed money from him&mdash;and
so I have&mdash;he's a man you'll like. The other one
is my old friend, Dr. Borg, who treated the little one.
He is very broad-minded, a man without any prejudices;
you'll get on with him! I can count on you,
can't I? There'll be four of us in the coach, and the
little coffin, of course."</p>

<p>"Very well, I'll come."</p>

<p>"There's one more thing. My wife has religious
scruples and is afraid that the little one won't go to
heaven because he died without baptism. She asks
everybody's opinion on the subject, so as to ease her
mind."</p>

<p>"But what about the Augsburg Confession?"</p>

<p>"It's not a question of confessions."</p>

<p>"But in writing to your paper, you always uphold
the official faith."</p>

<p>"The paper is the affair of the syndicate; if it likes
to cling to Christianity, it may do so for all I care!
My work for the syndicate is a matter apart. Please
agree with my wife if she tells you that she believes
that her child will go to heaven."</p>

<p>"I don't mind denying the faith in order to make a
human heart happy, particularly as I don't hold it.
But you haven't told me yet where you live."</p>

<p>"Do you know where the White Mountains are?"</p>

<p>"Yes! Are you living in the spotted house on the
mountain rock?"</p>

<p>"Do you know it?"</p>

<p>"I've been there once."</p>

<p>"Then perhaps you know Ygberg, the Socialist,
who leads the people astray? I am the landlord's
deputy&mdash;Smith owns the property&mdash;I live there rent
free on condition that I collect the rents; whenever
the rents are not forthcoming, the people talk nonsense
which he has put into their heads about capital
and labour, and other things which fill the columns of
the Socialistic press."</p>

<p>Falk did not reply.</p>

<p>"Do you know Ygberg?" <span class="pagenum">[206]</span></p>

<p>"Yes, I do. But won't you try on my dress-coat
now?"</p>

<p>Struve tried it on, put his own damp coat over it,
buttoned it up to the chin, lit the chewed-up end of his
cigar, impaled on a match, and went.</p>

<p>Falk lighted him downstairs.</p>

<p>"You've a long way to go," he said, merely to say
something.</p>

<p>"The Lord knows it! And I have no umbrella."</p>

<p>"And no overcoat. Would you like my winter
coat?"</p>

<p>"Many thanks. It's very kind of you."</p>

<p>"You can return it to me by and by."</p>

<p>He went back to his room, fetched the overcoat and
gave it to Struve, who was waiting in the entrance
hall. After a brief good-night they parted.</p>

<p>Falk found the atmosphere in his room stifling; he
opened the window. The rain was coming down in
torrents, splashing on the tiles and running down into
the dirty street. Tattoo sounded in the barracks
opposite; vespers were being sung in the lodgment;
fragments of the verses floated through the open
window.</p>

<p>Falk felt lonely and tired. He had been longing to
fight a battle with a representative of all he regarded
as inimical to progress; but the enemy, after having
to some extent beaten him, had fled. He tried to
understand clearly what the quarrel was about, but
failed in his effort; he was unable to say who was
right. He asked himself whether the cause he served,
namely, the cause of the oppressed, had any existence.
But at the next moment he reproached himself with
cowardice, and the steady fanaticism which glowed
in him burst into fresh flames; he condemned the
weakness which again and again had induced him to
yield. Just now he had held the enemy in his hand,
and not only had he not shown him his profound repugnance,
but he had even treated him with kindness
and sympathy; what would he think of him?</p>

<p>There was no merit in this good nature, as it pre<span class="pagenum">[207]</span>vented
him from coming to a firm decision; it was
nothing but moral laxity, making him incapable of
taking up a fight which seemed more and more beyond
him. He realized that he must extinguish the fire
under the boilers; they would not be able to stand
the pressure, as no steam was being used. He
pondered over Struve's advice, and brooded until his
mind was chaos in which truth and lies, right and
wrong, danced together in complete harmony; his
brain in which, owing to his academic training, all
conceptions had been so neatly pigeon-holed, would
soon resemble a pack of well-shuffled cards.</p>

<p>He succeeded beyond expectation in working himself
into a state of complete indifference; he looked
for fine motives in the actions of his enemies, and
gradually it appeared to him that he had all along
been in the wrong; he felt reconciled to the existing
order of things, and ultimately came to the fine conclusion
that it was quite immaterial whether the
whole was black or white. Whatever was, had to be;
he was not entitled to criticize it. He found this mood
pleasant, it gave him a feeling of restfulness to which
he had been a stranger all those years during which
he had made the troubles of humanity his own.</p>

<p>He was enjoying this calm and a pipe of strong
tobacco, when a maid servant brought him a letter
just delivered by the postman. It was from Olle
Montanus and very long. Parts of it seemed to
impress Falk greatly.</p>

<p>
<span class="smcap">My dear fellow</span>, [it ran,]<br />
</p>

<p>Although Lundell and I have now finished our
work and will soon be back in Stockholm, I yet feel
the need of writing down my impressions, because
they have been of great importance to myself and my
spiritual development. I have come to a conclusion,
and I am as full of amazement as a chicken which has
just been hatched, and stares at the world with its
newly opened eyes, trampling on the egg-shell which
had shut out the light for so long. The conclusion, of<span class="pagenum">[208]</span>
course, is not a new one; Plato propounded it before
Christianity was: the world, the visible world, is but
a delusion, the reflexion of the ideas; that is to say,
reality is something low, insignificant, secondary and
accidental. Yes! but I will proceed synthetically,
begin with the particular and pass on from it to the
general.</p>

<p>I will speak of my work first, in which both Government
and Parliament have been interested. On the
altar of the church at Träskola two wooden figures
used to stand; one of them was broken, but the other
one was whole. The whole one, the figure of a
woman, held a cross in her hand; two sacks of fragments
of the broken one were preserved in the
sacristy. A learned archæologist had examined the
contents of the two sacks, in order to determine the
appearance of the broken figure, but the result had
been mere conjecture.</p>

<p>But he had been very thorough. He had taken a
specimen of the white paint with which the figure had
been grounded, and sent it to the Pharmaceutical
Institute; the latter had reported that it contained
lead and not zinc; therefore, the figure must date
from before 1844, because zinc-white did not come
into use until after that date. (What can one say to
such a conclusion, seeing that the figure might have
been painted over!) Next he sent a sample of the
wood to the Stockholm timber office; he was informed
that it was birch. The figure was therefore
made of birchwood and dated from before 1844.</p>

<p>But that was not all he was striving for. He had
a reason (!) in plain words, he wished for his own
aggrandisement, that the carved figures should be
proved to date from the sixteenth century; and he
would have preferred that they should be the work
of the great&mdash;of course <i>great</i>, because his name had
been so deeply carved in oak that it has been preserved
to our time&mdash;Burchard von Schiedenhanne,
who had carved the seats in the choir of the Cathedral
of Västeros.<span class="pagenum">[209]</span></p>

<p>The learned research was carried on. The professor
stole a little plaster from the figures in Västeros
and sent it, together with a specimen from the sacristy
of Träskola to the Ekole Pollytechnik (I can't spell
it). The reply completely crushed the scoffers; the
analysis proved that the two specimens of plaster
were identical; both contained 77 per cent. of chalk
and 35 of sulphuric acid; therefore (!) the figures must
date from the same period.</p>

<p>The age of the figures had now been settled; a
sketch was made of the whole one and "sent in"
(what a terrible passion these learned men have for
"sending things in") to the Academy; the only
thing which remained to be done was to determine
and reconstruct the broken one. For two whole
years the two sacks travelled up and down between
Upsala and Lund; the two professors differed and
carried on a lively dispute. The professor of Lund,
who had just been made rector, took the figure as the
subject of his inaugural address and crushed the professor
of Upsala. The latter replied in a brochure.
Fortunately at the very moment a professor of the
Stockholm Academy of Art appeared with a totally
new opinion; then Herod and Pilate "compromised,"
as is always the case, and attacked the man from
the capital, rending him with the unbridled fury of
provincials.</p>

<p>This was their compromise: the broken figure had
represented Unbelief, because the other one must have
been meant for Faith, whose symbol is the cross.
The supposition (advanced by the professor of Lund)
that the broken figure had been intended to represent
Hope, arrived at because one of the sacks contained
an anchor, was rejected, because that would have
postulated a third figure, Love, of which there was no
trace, and for which there could have been no room;
moreover, it was proved by specimens from the rich
collection of arrow-heads in the historical museum,
that the fragment in question was not an anchor, but
an arrowhead, which forms a part of the weapons<span class="pagenum">[210]</span>
belonging to the symbols of Unbelief. The shape of the
arrowhead, which resembled in every detail those
from the period of the Vice-regent Sture, removed
the last doubt as to the age of the figure.</p>

<p>It was my task to make a statue of Unbelief, as a
companion to the figure of Faith, in accordance with
the directions of the professors. I was given my instructions
and I did not hesitate. I looked for a male
model, for the figure was to be a man; I had to look
for a long time, but I found him in the end; I really
believe I met the personification of Unbelief&mdash;and I
succeeded brilliantly.</p>

<p>And there he now stands, Falander, the actor, to
the left of the altar, with a Mexican bow (used in
the drama <i>Ferdinand Cortez</i>) and a robber's cloak
(from <i>Fra Diavolo</i>), but the people say that it is
Unbelief throwing down his arms before Faith. And
the Deputy-Superintendent, who preached the inaugural
sermon, spoke of the splendid gifts which God
sometimes gives to man, and which, in this case, he
had given to me; and the Count, who gave the inaugural
dinner, declared that I had created a masterpiece,
fit to stand side by side with the antiques
(he's been in Italy); and a student who occupies some
post in the Count's household, seized the opportunity
to write and circulate some verses, in which he
developed the conception of the Sublimely Beautiful,
and gave a history of the Myth of the Devil.</p>

<p>Up to now I have, like a true egoist, spoken only of
myself. What am I to say about Lundell's altar-piece?
I will try to describe it to you. Christ
(Rehnhjelm) hangs on the cross in the background;
to the left is the impenitent thief (I; and the rascal
has made me worse-looking than I am); to the right
the repenting thief (Lundell himself, squinting with
hypocritical eyes at Rehnhjelm); at the foot of the
cross Mary Magdalene (you will remember Marie&mdash;in
a very low dress), and a Roman centurion (Falander) on
horseback (stallion belonging to Alderman Olsson).</p>

<p>I cannot describe the awful impression made on me<span class="pagenum">[211]</span>
when, after the sermon, the picture was unveiled, and
I saw all these well-known faces staring from the wall
above the altar at the community rapturously listening
to the words of the preacher on the great importance
of art, particularly art in the service of religion.
As far as I am concerned, a veil has been lifted from
many things; I will tell you by and by my thoughts
on Faith and Unbelief. I am going to embody my
views on art and its high mission in an essay, and read
it at some public hall as soon as I am back in town.</p>

<p>It goes without saying that Lundell's religious sense
has tremendously developed during those "dear"
days. He is, comparatively speaking, happy in his
colossal self-deception, and has no idea what a rascal
he really is.</p>

<p>I think I have told you everything now; anything
else verbally when we meet. Until then, good-bye.
I hope you are in good health and spirits.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
Your friend, &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;<br />

<span class="smcap">Olle Montanus</span>.<br /><br />
</div>

<p>P.S. I must not forget to tell you the result of the
antiquarian research. The end of it all was that old
Jan, an inmate of the almshouses, remembered having
seen the figures when he was a child. He said there
had been three: Faith, Hope, and Love; and as
Love was the greatest of these, it had stood above the
altar. In the first decade of this century a flash of
lightning had struck Love and Faith. The figures
had been the work of his father who was a carver of
figure-heads in the naval port Karlskrona.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
O. M.<br />
</div>

<p>When Falk had read the letters, he sat down at his
writing-table, examined his lamp to see whether there
was plenty of oil in it, lit his pipe, took a manuscript
from his table-drawer, and began to write.<span class="pagenum">[212]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIX" id="CHAPTER_XIX"></a>CHAPTER XIX</h2>

<h3>FROM CHURCHYARD TO PUBLIC-HOUSE</h3>


<p>The September afternoon lay grey and warm and
still over the capital as Falk climbed the hills in the
south. When he had arrived at the churchyard of
St. Catherine's he sat down to rest; he noticed with
a feeling of genuine pleasure that the maples had
turned colour during the recent cold nights, and he
welcomed autumn with its darkness, its grey clouds,
and falling leaves.</p>

<p>Not a breath stirred; it was as if Nature were
resting, tired after the work of the short summer.
Everything was asleep; the dead were lying beneath
the sod, calm and peaceful, as if they had never been
alive; he wished that he had all men there, and that
he, himself, was with them.</p>

<p>The clock on the tower chimed the hour, and he
rose and continued his walk. He went down Garden
Street, turned into New Street&mdash;which looked as if it
had been new a hundred years ago at least&mdash;crossed
the New Market, and came to the White Mountains.</p>

<p>He stood still before the spotted house, listening
to the children's chatter, for, as usual, there were
children playing about the street; they talked loudly
and unreservedly while they were busy polishing
little pieces of brick, presently to be used in a game
of hop-scotch.</p>

<p>"What did you have for dinner, Janne?"</p>

<p>"That's my business!"</p>

<p>"Your business? Did you say it was your
business? Mind what you're about or you'll get a
hiding." <span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_213" id="Page_213">[213]</a></span></p>

<p>"Don't brag! You with your eyes!"</p>

<p>"Who shoved you into the lake the other day?"</p>

<p>"Oh! shut up!"</p>

<p>Janne received a thrashing, and peace was restored.</p>

<p>"I say! You stole cress in the churchyard the
other day, didn't you, Janne?"</p>

<p>"That cripple Olee split on me!"</p>

<p>"And you were nabbed by the police, weren't
you?"</p>

<p>"Who cares for the police? I don't!"</p>

<p>"Don't you? Come along of us to-night then;
we're going to pinch some pears."</p>

<p>"There's a savage dog behind the fence!"</p>

<p>"Garn! Chimney-sweep's Peter'll climb over and
a kick'll do for the dog."</p>

<p>The polishing was interrupted by a maid-servant
who came out of the house and began to scatter pine
branches on the grass-grown street.</p>

<p>"Who's going to be buried?"</p>

<p>"The deputy's wife's baby!"</p>

<p>"He's a proper old Satan, the deputy, isn't he?"</p>

<p>Instead of replying, the other began whistling an
unknown and very peculiar tune.</p>

<p>"Let's thrash his red-haired cubs when they come
home from school! I say! Doesn't his old woman
fancy herself? The old she-devil locked us out in
the snow the other night because we couldn't pay
the rent, and we had to spend the night in the barn."</p>

<p>The conversation flickered out; the last item of
conversation had not made the smallest impression
on Janne's friend.</p>

<p>After this introduction to the status of the tenants
by the two urchins, Falk entered the house not with
the pleasantest of sensations. He was received at
the door by Struve, who looked distressed, and took
Falk's arm as if he were going to confide a secret to
him, or suppress a tear&mdash;he had to do something, so
he embraced him.</p>

<p>Falk found himself in a big room with a dining-table,
a sideboard, six chairs, and a coffin. White<span class="pagenum">[214]</span>
sheets were hanging before the windows through
which the daylight filtered and broke at the red glow
of the tallow candles; on the table stood a tray
with green wine glasses, and a soup tureen filled
with dahlias, stocks, and white asters.</p>

<p>Struve seized Falk's hand and led him to the
coffin where the baby lay bedded on shavings, covered
with tulle, and strewn with fuchsias.</p>

<p>"There!" he said, "there!"</p>

<p>Falk felt nothing but the quite commonplace
emotion the living always feel in the presence of the
dead; he could think of nothing suitable to say, and
therefore he confined himself to pressing the father's
hand. "Thank you, thank you," stammered Struve,
and disappeared in an adjoining room.</p>

<p>Falk was left alone; he could hear excited whispering
behind the door through which Struve had
vanished; then it grew still for a while; but
presently a murmur from the other end of the room
penetrated the matchboard wall. A strident treble
seemed to be reciting long verses with incredible
volubility.</p>

<p>"Babebibobubybäbö&mdash;Babebibobubybäbö&mdash;Babebibobubybäbö,"
it sounded.</p>

<p>An angry man's voice answered to the accompaniment
of a plane which said hwitcho&mdash;hwitcho&mdash;hwitch&mdash;hwitch&mdash;hitch&mdash;hitch.</p>

<p>And a long-drawn, rumbling mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-<i>m</i>um
replied, seemingly anxious to
calm the storm. But the plane spat and sneezed
again its hwitch&mdash;hwitch, and immediately after a
storm of Babili&mdash;bebili&mdash;bibili&mdash;bobili&mdash;bubili&mdash;bybili&mdash;bäbili&mdash;bö&mdash;broke
out with fresh fury.</p>

<p>Falk guessed the subject under discussion, and a
certain intonation gave him the idea that the dead
baby was involved in the argument.</p>

<p>The whispering, occasionally interrupted by loud
sobs, began again behind the door through which
Struve had disappeared; finally it was pushed open
and Struve appeared leading by the hand a woman<span class="pagenum">[215]</span>
who looked like a laundress; she was dressed in
black, and her eyelids were red and swollen with
weeping. Struve introduced her with all the dignity
of a father of a family:</p>

<p>"My wife, Mr. Falk, my old friend."</p>

<p>Falk clasped a hand, hard as a beetle, and received
a vinegary smile. He cast about for a few platitudes
containing the words "wife" and "grief," and as he
was fairly successful, he was rewarded by Struve with
an embrace.</p>

<p>Mrs. Struve, anxious not to be left out in the cold,
began brushing the back of her husband's coat.</p>

<p>"It's dreadful how you seem to pick up every bit
of dirt, Christian," she said; "your back's always
dusty. Don't you think that my husband always
looks like a pig, Mr. Falk?"</p>

<p>There was no need for poor Falk to reply to this
tender remark; behind the mother's back now
appeared two heads, regarding the visitor with a grin.
The mother patted them affectionately.</p>

<p>"Have you ever seen plainer boys before, Mr.
Falk?" she asked. "Don't they look exactly like
young foxes?"</p>

<p>This statement was so undeniably accurate that
Falk felt compelled to deny it eagerly.</p>

<p>The opening of the hall door and the entrance of
two men stopped all further civilities. The first of
the new-comers was a man of thirty, broad-shouldered,
with a square head, the front of which was supposed
to represent the face; the skin looked like the half-rotten
plank of a bridge in which worms have
ploughed their labyrinths; the wide mouth, always
slightly open, showed the four shining eye-teeth;
whenever he smiled his face seemed to split into two
parts; his mouth opened as far back as the fourth
back tooth; not a single hair grew in the barren
soil; the nose was so badly put on that one could
see through it far into the head; on the upper part
of the skull grew something which looked like cocoa-nut
matting.<span class="pagenum">[216]</span></p>

<p>Struve, who possessed the faculty of ennobling his
environment, introduced Candidate Borg as Dr. Borg.
The latter, without a sign of either pleasure or annoyance,
held out his arm to his companion, who pulled
off the coat and hung it on the hinge of the front door,
an act which drew from Mrs. Struve the remark that
the old house was in such bad repair that there was
not even a hall-stand.</p>

<p>The man who had helped Borg off with his overcoat
was introduced as Mr. Levi. He was a tall,
overgrown youth; the skull seemed but a backward
development of the nasal bone, and the trunk which
reached to the knees, looked as if it had been drawn
through a wire plate, in the way in which wire is
drawn; the shoulders slanted like eaves; there was
no trace of hips, the shanks ran up into the thighs;
the feet were worn out of shape like a pair of old
shoes; the instep had given way. The legs curved
outward and downward, like the legs of a working
man who has carried heavy loads, or stood for the
greater part of his life. He was a pure slave-type.</p>

<p>The candidate had remained at the door; he had
taken off his gloves, put down his stick, blown his
nose, and put back the handkerchief into his pocket
without taking the least notice of Struve's repeated
attempts to introduce him; he believed that he was
still in the entrance hall; but now he took his hat,
scraped the floor with his foot and made a step into
the room.</p>

<p>"Good morning, Jenny! How are you?" he said,
seizing Mrs. Struve's hand with as much eagerness
as if it were a matter of life and death. He bowed,
hardly perceptibly, to Falk, with the snarl of a dog
who sees a strange dog in its yard.</p>

<p>Young Mr. Levi followed at the heels of the
candidate, responding to his smiles, applauding his
sarcasms, and generally kow-towing to his superiority.</p>

<p>Mrs. Struve opened a bottle of hock and filled the
glasses. Struve raised his glass and welcomed his
guests. The candidate opened his mouth, made a<span class="pagenum">[217]</span>
canal of his tongue, poured the contents of the glass
on it, grinned as if it were physic and swallowed it.</p>

<p>"It's awfully sour and nasty," said Mrs. Struve;
"would you prefer a glass of punch, Henrik?"</p>

<p>"Yes, it <i>is</i> very nasty," agreed the candidate,
and Levi eagerly seconded him.</p>

<p>The punch was brought in. Borg's face brightened;
he looked for a chair, and immediately Levi brought
him one.</p>

<p>The party sat down round the dining-table. The
strong scent of the stocks mingled with the smell of
the wine; the candles were reflected in the glasses,
the conversation became lively, and soon a column
of smoke stood above the candidate's chair. Mrs.
Struve glanced uneasily at the little sleeper near the
window, but nobody saw her look.</p>

<p>Presently a coach stopped in the street outside the
house. Everybody rose except the candidate.
Struve coughed, and in a low voice, as if he had
something unpleasant to say, he whispered:</p>

<p>"Shall we get ready now?"</p>

<p>Mrs. Struve went to the coffin and stooped over it,
weeping bitterly; when, in drawing back, she saw
her husband standing behind her with the coffin lid,
she burst into loud sobs.</p>

<p>"There, there, compose yourself," said Struve,
hastening to screw down the lid as if he wanted to
hide something. Borg, looking like a yawning horse,
gulped down another glass of punch. Mr. Levi
helped Struve to screw down the lid, displaying quite
extraordinary skill; he seemed to be packing a bale
of goods.</p>

<p>The men shook hands with Mrs. Struve, put on
their overcoats and went; the woman warned them
to be careful in going downstairs; the stairs were old
and rotten.</p>

<p>Struve marched in front, carrying the coffin; when
he stepped into the street and became aware of the
little crowd which had collected before the house, he
felt flattered, and the devil of pride took possession<span class="pagenum">[218]</span>
of him. He scolded the driver who had omitted to
open the door and let down the steps; to heighten
the effect of his words, he spoke with contemptuous
familiarity to the tall man in livery who, hat in hand,
hastened to carry out his commands.</p>

<p>From the centre of the crowd, where the boy Janne
was standing, came a short, scornful cough; but
when the boy saw that he was attracting universal
attention, he raised his eyes towards the chimneys,
and seemed to be eagerly looking for the sweep.</p>

<p>The door of the coach slammed behind the four
men; a lively conversation broke out between some
of the younger members of the mass-meeting, who
now felt more at their ease.</p>

<p>"I say, what a swell coffin! Did you see it?"</p>

<p>"Yes! But did you see that there was no name
on it?"</p>

<p>"Wasn't there?"</p>

<p>"No! Didn't you see it? It was quite plain."</p>

<p>"Why was that, then?"</p>

<p>"Don't you know? Because he was a bastard...."</p>

<p>The whip cracked, and the coach rumbled off.
Falk's eyes strayed to the window; he caught a
glimpse of Mrs. Struve, who had already removed
some of the sheets, blowing out the candles; and he
saw the two cubs standing by the side of her, each
with a glass of wine in his hand.</p>

<p>The coach rattled along, through street after street;
nobody attempted to speak. Struve, sitting with the
coffin on his knees, looked embarrassed; it was still
daylight; he longed to make himself invisible.</p>

<p>It was a long journey to the churchyard, but
it finally came to an end. They arrived.</p>

<p>A row of coaches stood before the gate. They
bought wreaths and the gravedigger took possession
of the coffin. After a lengthy walk, the small procession
stopped quite at the back on the north side
of the churchyard, close to a new sandfield.</p>

<p>The gravedigger placed the coffin in position.</p>

<p>Borg commanded:<span class="pagenum">[219]</span></p>

<p>"Hold tight! Ease off! Let go!"</p>

<p>And the little nameless child was lowered three
yards into the ground.</p>

<p>There was a pause; all heads were bowed and all
eyes looking into the grave, as if they were waiting
for something.</p>

<p>A leaden sky gloomed dismally over the large,
deserted sandfield, the white poles of which looked
like the shadows of little children who had lost their
way. The dark wood might have been the background
in a magic lantern show; the wind was
hushed.</p>

<p>All of a sudden a voice rose, tremulous at first,
but growing in clearness and intensity, as if it were
speaking from an inner conviction. Levi was standing
on the pall, bare-headed:</p>

<p>"In the safe keeping of the Most High, resting in
the shadow of His omnipotence, I say to the Eternal:
Oh, Thou my stronghold, my defence in all eternity,
my God in whom I trust&mdash;Kaddisch. Lord,
Almighty God, let Thy holy name be worshipped and
sanctified in the whole world. Thou wilt, in Thy
own time, renew the world. Thou wilt awaken the
dead and call them to a new life. Everlasting peace
reigns in Thy kingdom. Give us and all Israel Thy
peace. Amen.</p>

<p>"Sleep soundly, little one, to whom no name had
been given. He who knoweth His own will give you
a name; sleep soundly in the autumn night, no evil
spirits will trouble you, although you never received
the holy water; rejoice that you are spared the
battle of life; you can dispense with its pleasures.
Count yourself happy that you were permitted to
go, before you knew the world; pure and stainless
your soul left its delicate tenement; therefore we
will not throw earth on your coffin, for earth is an
emblem of dissolution; we will bed you in flowers,
for as a flower pierces the soil, so your soul shall rise
from the dark grave to the light; from spirit you
came, to spirit you will return." <span class="pagenum">[220]</span></p>

<p>He dropped his wreath into the little grave and
covered his head. Struve took a few steps towards
him, seized his hand, and shook it warmly; tears
rolled down his cheeks, and he begged Levi for the
loan of his handkerchief. Borg, after throwing his
wreath into the grave, turned to go, and the others
followed slowly.</p>

<p>Falk stood gazing into the open grave, plunged in
deep thought. At first he saw only a square of
darkness; but gradually a bright spot appeared
which grew and took shape; it looked like a disc
and shone with the whiteness of a mirror&mdash;it was
the blank shield on which the life of the child should
have been recorded. It gleamed brightly in the
darkness, reflecting the unbroken daylight. He
dropped his wreath. There was a faint, dull thud,
and the light went out. He turned and followed the
others.</p>

<p>Arrived at the coach, there was a brief discussion.
Borg cut it short.</p>

<p>"To the Restaurant Norrbacka!" he said,
briefly.<br /><br /></p>



<p>A few minutes later the party was standing in the
large room on the first floor; they were received
by a girl whom Borg embraced and kissed; this
done, he pushed his hat underneath the sofa, commanded
Levi to help him off with his overcoat, and
ordered a quart of punch, twenty-five cigars, half a
pint of brandy, and a sugar-loaf. Finally he took off
his coat and sat down in shirt sleeves on the only sofa
in the room.</p>

<p>Struve's face beamed when he saw the preparations
for an orgy, and he shouted for music. Levi went to
the piano and strummed a waltz, while Struve put
his arm into Falk's and walked with him up and
down the room. He touched lightly on life in general,
on grief and joy, the inconstant nature of man, and so
on, all of which went to prove that it was a sin to
mourn what the gods&mdash;he said gods, because he had<span class="pagenum">[221]</span>
already said sin and did not wish to be taken for a
pietist&mdash;had given and taken.</p>

<p>This reflexion was apparently made by way of an
introduction to the waltz which he immediately after
danced with the girl who brought the bowl.</p>

<p>Borg filled the glasses, called Levi, nodded towards
a glass, and said:</p>

<p>"Let's drink to our brotherly love now; later on
we can be as rude as we like."</p>

<p>Levi expressed his appreciation of the honour.</p>

<p>"Your health, Isaac!" said Borg.</p>

<p>"My name's not Isaac!"</p>

<p>"What the dickens do I care what your name is?
I call you Isaac, my Isaac."</p>

<p>"You're a jolly devil...."</p>

<p>"Devil! Shame on you, Jew!"</p>

<p>"We were going to be as rude as we liked...."</p>

<p>"We? I was, as far as you are concerned!"</p>

<p>Struve thought he had better interfere.</p>

<p>"Thank you, brother Levi, for your beautiful
words," he said. "What prayer was that?"</p>

<p>"Our funeral prayer!"</p>

<p>"It was beautiful!"</p>

<p>"Nothing but empty words," interposed Borg.
"The infidel dog prayed only for Israel; therefore
the prayer couldn't have been meant for the child."</p>

<p>"All those who are not baptized are looked upon
as belonging to Israel," replied Levi.</p>

<p>"And then you attacked baptism," continued
Borg. "I don't allow anybody to attack baptism&mdash;we
can do that ourselves. And furthermore you
attacked the doctrine of justification by faith. Leave
it alone in future; I don't permit any outsiders to
attack our religion."</p>

<p>"Borg's right there," said Struve; "we should
draw the line at attacking either baptism or any
other of the sacred truths; and I must beg of you
not to indulge in any frivolous discussion of these
things to-night."</p>

<p>"You must beg of us?" sneered Borg. "Must<span class="pagenum">[222]</span>
you really? All right! I'll forgive you if you'll
hold your tongue. Play something, Isaac! Music!
Why is music mute at Cæsar's feast? Music! But
none of your old chestnuts! Play something
new!"</p>

<p>Levi went to the piano, and played the overture to
"The Mute."</p>

<p>"Now, let's talk," said Borg. "You are looking
depressed, Mr. Falk; have a glass with me."</p>

<p>Falk, who felt a certain embarrassment in Borg's
company, accepted the offer with mental reservations.
But conversation languished, everybody
seemed to dread a collision.</p>

<p>Struve fluttered about like a moth in search of
pleasure, but unable to find it he again and again
returned to the punch-table; every now and then
he danced a few steps, to keep up the fiction that
the meeting was merry and festive; but this was
not the case by any means.</p>

<p>Levi see-sawed between piano and punch. He
attempted to sing a cheerful song, but it was so stale
that nobody would listen to it.</p>

<p>Borg talked at the top of his voice, "in order to
raise his spirits," as he said, but the party grew more
and more silent, one might almost have said uneasy.</p>

<p>Falk paced up and down the room, taciturn, portentous
like a thundercloud.</p>

<p>At Borg's order a tremendous supper, a "sexa"
was served. The convives took their seats amidst
ominous silence. Struve and Borg drank immoderate
quantities of brandy; in the face of the latter red
spots appeared here and there, and the white of the
eyes looked yellow. But Struve resembled a varnished
Edam cheese; he was uniformly red and
greasy. Beside them Falk and Levi looked like
children, eating their last supper in the society of
giants.</p>

<p>Borg looked at Levi. "Hand the salmon to the
scandal-monger," he commanded, in order to break
the monotonous silence.<span class="pagenum">[223]</span></p>

<p>Levi handed the dish to Struve. The latter pushed
his spectacles on to his forehead and spat venom.</p>

<p>"Shame on you, Jew," he foamed, throwing his
dinner-napkin in Levi's face.</p>

<p>Borg laid a heavy hand on Struve's bald pate.</p>

<p>"Silence, you blackguard!" he said.</p>

<p>"What dreadful company to be mixed up with!
Let me tell you, gentlemen, I'm too old to be treated
like a schoolboy," said Struve, tremulously, forgetting
his usual <i>bonhomie</i>.</p>

<p>Borg, who had had enough to eat, rose from the
table.</p>

<p>"Ugh!" he said, "what a beastly crowd you are!
Pay, Isaac, I'll pay you back later on; I'm going."</p>

<p>He put on his overcoat, put his hat on his head,
filled a tumbler with punch, added brandy to it,
emptied it at one gulp, blew out some of the candles
in passing, smashed a few of the glasses, pocketed a
handful of cigars and a box of matches, and staggered
out of the room.</p>

<p>"What a pity that such a genius should drink like
that," said Levi solemnly.</p>

<p>A moment later Borg re-entered the room, went to
the dining-table, took the candelabrum, lighted his
cigar, blew the smoke into Struve's face, put out his
tongue, showed his back teeth, extinguished the
lights, and departed again. Levi rolled on the floor
screaming with laughter.</p>

<p>"To what scum have you introduced me?" asked
Falk gravely.</p>

<p>"Oh, my dear fellow, he's intoxicated to-night,
but he's the son of Professor Dr...."</p>

<p>"I didn't ask who his father was, I asked who
he was," said Falk, cutting him short, "I understand
now why you allow such a dog to bully you;
but can you tell me why he associates with
you?"</p>

<p>"I reserve my reply to all these futilities," answered
Struve stiffly.</p>

<p>"Do reserve it, but reserve it for yourself!" <span class="pagenum">[224]</span></p>

<p>"What's the matter with you, brother Levi?"
asked Struve officiously; "you look so grave."</p>

<p>"It's a great pity that a genius like Borg should
drink so much," replied Levi.</p>

<p>"How and when does he show his genius?" asked
Falk.</p>

<p>"A man can be a genius without writing verse,"
said Struve pointedly.</p>

<p>"I dare say; writing verse does not pre-suppose
genius, nor is a man a genius if he behaves like a
brute," said Falk.</p>

<p>"Hadn't we better pay and go?" remarked Struve,
hurrying towards the door.</p>

<p>Falk and Levi paid. When they stepped into the
street it rained and the sky was black; only the
reflexion of the gas-lit town faintly illuminated the
sky. The coach had driven away; there was nothing
left for them but to turn up their collars and walk.</p>

<p>They had gone as far as the skittle-alley, when
they were startled by terrible yells above their heads.</p>

<p>"Curse you!" screamed a voice, and looking up
they saw Borg rocking himself on one of the highest
branches of a lime tree. The branch nearly touched
the ground, but at the next moment it described a
tremendous curve upwards.</p>

<p>"Oh! Isn't it colossal!" screamed Levi.
"Colossal!"</p>

<p>"What a madman," smiled Struve, proud of his
protégé.</p>

<p>"Come along, Isaac!" bellowed Borg, high up in
the air, "come along, Jew, let's borrow money from
each other!"</p>

<p>"How much do you want?" asked Levi, waving
his pocket book.</p>

<p>"I never borrow less than fifty!"</p>

<p>At the next moment Borg had slid to the ground
and pocketed the note.</p>

<p>Then he took off his overcoat.</p>

<p>"Put it on again immediately!" commanded
Struve.<span class="pagenum">[225]</span></p>

<p>"What do you say? I'm to put it on again?
Who are you to order me about? What? Do you
want a fight?"</p>

<p>He smashed his hat against the tree, took off coat
and waistcoat, and let the rain beat on his shirt.</p>

<p>"Come here, you rascal! Let's have a fight!"</p>

<p>He seized Struve round the waist, and, staggering
backwards, both of them fell into the ditch.</p>

<p>Falk hurried away as fast as he could. And for
a long time he could hear behind him outbursts of
laughter and shouts of bravo. He could distinguish
Levi's voice yelling: "It's divine, it's colossal&mdash;it's
colossal!" And Borg's: "Traitor! Traitor!" <span class="pagenum">[226]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XX" id="CHAPTER_XX"></a>CHAPTER XX</h2>

<h3>ON THE ALTAR</h3>


<p>The clock in the Town-hall Vaults of X-köping
thundered the seventh hour of an October evening
as the manager of the Municipal Theatre came in.
He beamed as a toad may beam after a good meal;
he looked happy, but his facial muscles, not accustomed
to express such emotions, drew the skin
into worried folds and disfigured him still more
than usual. He nodded patronizingly to the little
shrivelled head-waiter who was standing behind
the bar counting the guests.</p>

<p>"Well, and how's the world treating you?"
screamed the manager in German&mdash;he had dropped the
habit of speaking long ago.</p>

<p>"Thank you!" replied the head-waiter in the
same language, and as this was all the German the
two gentlemen knew, the conversation was continued
in Swedish.</p>

<p>"Well, what do you think of the lad Gustav?
Wasn't his Don Diego excellent? Don't you admit
that I can make actors? What?"</p>

<p>"There's no denying that! Fancy, that boy!
It's quite true what you said, sir. It's easier to do
something with a man who hasn't been ruined
by book-learning."</p>

<p>"Books are the ruin of a good many people. Nobody
knows that better than I do. However, do
you know anything about books? I do! You
will see queer things when young Rehnhjelm plays
Horatio! I've promised him the part, because
he gave me no peace; but I've also warned him<span class="pagenum">[227]</span>
not to look to me for any assistance. I don't want to
be held responsible for his failure; I also told him
that I was allowing him to play the part to show
him how difficult it is to act when one has no talent.
Oh! He shall have such a snub that he'll never look
at a part again. See if he won't! But that isn't
what I want to say to you! Have you got two
vacant rooms?"</p>

<p>"The two small ones?"</p>

<p>"Just so!"</p>

<p>"They're at your disposal, sir!"</p>

<p>"Supper for two, the best you can do! You'd
better do the waiting yourself."</p>

<p>He did not shout the last few words; the head-waiter
bowed; he had understood.</p>

<p>At this moment Falander entered the room. He
took his accustomed seat without as much as a look
at the manager. The latter rose immediately. "At
eight then," he whispered, as he passed the bar and
went out.</p>

<p>The head-waiter brought Falander a bottle of
absinth, and all the usual trimmings. As the actor
seemed disinclined to enter into conversation, the
head-waiter wiped the table with his napkin; when
that was no good, he refilled the match-stand, and
said:</p>

<p>"Supper to-night, the small rooms! Hm!"</p>

<p>"Of whom and of what are you talking?"</p>

<p>"Of him who's just gone out."</p>

<p>"I see! But that's unusual, he's generally so
mean. Supper for one?"</p>

<p>"For two," replied the head-waiter, winking.
"In the small rooms, hm!"</p>

<p>Falander pricked up his ears, but at the same time
he felt ashamed to be listening to gossip and dropped
the subject; but that was not what the head-waiter
wanted.</p>

<p>"I wonder who it is? His wife is ill, and...."</p>

<p>"What does it matter to us? Let the monster sup
with whom he likes! Have you an evening paper?" <span class="pagenum">[228]</span></p>

<p>The head-waiter was saved a reply. Rehnhjelm
was approaching the table, radiant, like a man who
sees a ray of light on his path.</p>

<p>"Leave the absinth alone to-night," he said, "and
be my guest. I am happy, I could cry."</p>

<p>"What has happened?" asked Falander uneasily.
"Surely, he hasn't given you a part?"</p>

<p>"He has, you pessimist! I'm to play
Horatio...."</p>

<p>Falander's face clouded.</p>

<p>"And she'll play Ophelia."</p>

<p>"How do you know?"</p>

<p>"I feel it."</p>

<p>"You and your premonitions! But after all, it
wasn't so difficult to guess. Don't you think she
deserves it? Have they a better Ophelia in the
whole company?"</p>

<p>"No, I admit that! Do you like your part?"</p>

<p>"Oh! It's splendid!"</p>

<p>"It's extraordinary how opinions differ."</p>

<p>"What do <i>you</i> think?"</p>

<p>"I think that he is the greatest rascal at the
whole court; he says Yes to everything: 'Yes,
my prince; yes, my good prince.' If he were really
Hamlet's friend, he would sometimes say No, and
not always agree with him like any other sycophant."</p>

<p>"Are you going to overthrow another of my
ideals?"</p>

<p>"I will overthrow all your false idols! How
can you&mdash;as long as you look upon all paltry creations
of man as great and splendid&mdash;strive after the
eternal? If you see perfection and excellence in
everything here below, how can you yearn for the
really perfect? Believe me, pessimism is the truest
idealism! It is a Christian doctrine too, if that will
salve your conscience, for Christianity teaches us
that the world is a vale of tears from which death
will deliver us!"</p>

<p>"Can't you let me believe that the world is beautiful?
Can't you let me be grateful to Him who is the<span class="pagenum">[229]</span>
giver of all good things, and rejoice in the happiness
life has to offer?"</p>

<p>"Yes, yes, my boy, rejoice, rejoice and believe
and hope! As all men strive for the same thing&mdash;happiness&mdash;you
will have the 1,439,134,300th part
of a chance of winning it, seeing that the denominator
of this fraction represents the number of people on
this earth. Is the happiness which has come to you
to-day worth the torture and humiliations of the
last few months? And moreover&mdash;what is this
great piece of luck? You have been given a part to
play, a part in which you cannot make a success&mdash;by
which I don't mean that you necessarily need
be a failure. Are you sure that...."</p>

<p>He paused for breath.</p>

<p>"That Agnes will have a success in the part of
Ophelia? She may make good use of the rare
chance and get as much out of the part as most
actresses do. I am sorry I made you feel sad; don't
believe what I said; after all, who knows whether
I am right or wrong?"</p>

<p>"If I didn't know you better, I might believe you
that you're jealous."</p>

<p>"No, my boy; nothing would please me more
than to see yours and all men's wishes speedily
fulfilled; then the thoughts of men might turn to
higher things. Perhaps that is the meaning of life."</p>

<p>"You can afford to say that so calmly; you have
had success long ago."</p>

<p>"Isn't this a state of mind much to be desired?
We do not yearn for happiness so much, as for the
faculty of being able to smile at our ardent efforts.
I say <i>ardent</i> advisedly."</p>

<p>Eight strokes thundered through the room.
Falander rose hastily as if he were going to leave,
brushed his hand across his forehead and sat down
again.</p>

<p>"Has Agnes gone to see Aunt Beata to-night?"
he asked casually.</p>

<p>"What makes you think so?" <span class="pagenum">[230]</span></p>

<p>"I'm merely supposing it because you are sitting
here so quietly. She told you she would read her
part to her, as the time is so short, didn't she?"</p>

<p>"Yes; have you seen her to-night?"</p>

<p>"No! On my word of honour, I haven't! Only
I can't think of anything else which would prevent
her from spending a free evening with you."</p>

<p>"You guessed correctly. She urged me to go
out and spend the evening with friends; she thinks
I'm too much at home. The dear girl! She has
such a tender and loving little heart."</p>

<p>"Yes, very tender!"</p>

<p>"I only once waited for her in vain; her aunt
had kept her till late and forgotten to send me word.
I thought I was going mad and couldn't sleep all
night."</p>

<p>"You are referring to the evening of the sixth
of July, I suppose?"</p>

<p>"You startle me! Are you watching us?"</p>

<p>"Why should I? I know of your engagement
and aid you in every way I can. And why shouldn't
I know that it was Tuesday the sixth of July?
You've told me about it more than once."</p>

<p>"That's true!"</p>

<p>Neither of them spoke for a while.</p>

<p>"It's extraordinary," said Rehnhjelm, suddenly
breaking the silence, "that happiness can make
one feel melancholy; I feel uneasy to-night, and
would much rather have spent the evening with Agnes.
Let's go to the small rooms and send for her. She
could say that friends had arrived from the country."</p>

<p>"She wouldn't do that; she couldn't tell a lie."</p>

<p>"Oh, nonsense! The woman who can't isn't
born yet!"</p>

<p>Falander stared at Rehnhjelm with so peculiar
an expression, that the latter felt puzzled.</p>

<p>"I'll go and see whether the little rooms are
vacant," he said after a short pause; "we can send
her a message, if they are."</p>

<p>"Come along then!" <span class="pagenum">[231]</span></p>

<p>Rehnhjelm made ready to follow him, but Falander
kept him back.</p>

<p>"I'll be back in two minutes!"</p>

<p>He returned with a very white face, but perfectly
calm.</p>

<p>"They are engaged," he said quietly.</p>

<p>"What a nuisance!"</p>

<p>"Let's keep each other company and be as jolly
as we can!"</p>

<p>And they kept each other company, ate and
drank and talked of life and love and human malice;
and when they had eaten and drunk and talked
enough, they went home and to bed.<span class="pagenum">[232]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXI" id="CHAPTER_XXI"></a>CHAPTER XXI</h2>

<h3>A SOUL OVERBOARD</h3>


<p>Rehnhjelm awoke on the following morning at four
o'clock; somebody had called his name. He sat
up in bed and listened&mdash;there was not a sound. He
drew up the blind and looked out on a grey autumn
morning, windy and rainy. He went back to bed
and tried to sleep, but in vain. There were strange
voices in the wind; they moaned and warned and
wept and whimpered. He tried to think of something
pleasant: of his happiness. He took his part and
began to learn it; it seemed to be nothing but
<i>yes</i>, <i>my prince</i>; he thought of Falander's words and
could not help admitting that he was to some extent
right. He tried to picture himself on the stage as
Horatio; he tried to picture Agnes in the part of
Ophelia, and could see in her nothing but a hypocritical
schemer, spreading nets for Hamlet at
Polonius's advice. He attempted to drive away the
thought, and instead of Agnes he saw the coquettish
Miss Jacquette, who had been the last to play the part
at the Municipal Theatre.</p>

<p>He tried in vain to drive away these disagreeable
fancies; they followed him like gnats. At last,
exhausted with the strain, he fell asleep, but only
to suffer the same torment in his dream; he roused
himself with an effort, but soon dropped off to sleep
again, and immediately the same visions disturbed
him. About nine o'clock he awoke with a scream,
and jumped out of bed as if he were fleeing from evil
spirits. When he looked into the glass he saw that
his eyes were red with weeping. He dressed hastily<span class="pagenum">[233]</span>
and as he picked up his boot, a big spider ran across
the floor. The sight pleased him for he believed in
the superstition that a spider is a harbinger of happiness;
his good-humour was restored and he came to
the conclusion that if a man wanted an undisturbed
night's rest, he should avoid crabs for supper. He
drank his coffee and smoked a pipe and smiled at the
rain-showers and the wind. A knock at the door
aroused him from his reverie; he started, for he was
afraid of news, he could not tell why; but he thought
of the spider and calmly opened the door.</p>

<p>A servant handed him a letter from Falander,
begging him to come to his rooms at ten, on very
important business.</p>

<p>Again he was assailed by the indescribable feeling
of fear which had troubled his morning slumber;
he tried to while away the time until ten. It was
impossible; he dressed and went to Falander's
house.</p>

<p>The latter had risen early; his room had been put
straight and he was ready to receive his friend. He
greeted Rehnhjelm cordially, but with unusual
gravity. Rehnhjelm overwhelmed him with questions,
but Falander refused to reply before ten o'clock.
Rehnhjelm's anxiety grew and he wanted to know
whether there was unpleasant news; Falander replied
that nothing on earth was unpleasant as long as one
looked at things in the right light. And he declared
that many so-called unbearable situations could be
borne quite easily if only one did not exaggerate
their importance.</p>

<p>The time passed slowly, but at last it struck ten.
A gentle double-rap at the door relieved the tension.
Falander opened at once and admitted Agnes.
Without a look at those present she drew the key from
the lock, and locked the door from the inside. A
momentary embarrassment seized her when, on turning
round, she was confronted by two men instead of
only one, but her embarrassment gave way to pleasant
surprise when she recognized Rehnhjelm. Throwing<span class="pagenum">[234]</span>
off her water-proof, she ran towards him; he took
her in his arms and passionately pressed her to his
heart, as if he had not seen her for a year.</p>

<p>"You've been away a long time, Agnes!"</p>

<p>"A long time? What do you mean?"</p>

<p>"I feel as if I hadn't seen you for a life-time. How
splendid you are looking! Did you sleep well?"</p>

<p>"Do you think I look better than usual?"</p>

<p>"Yes! You are flushed and there are little dimples
in your cheeks! Won't you say good morning to
Falander?"</p>

<p>The latter stood quietly listening to the conversation,
but his face was deadly white and he seemed to
be absorbed in thought.</p>

<p>"How worn you are looking," said Agnes, crossing
the room with the graceful movements of a kitten, as
Rehnhjelm released her from his arms.</p>

<p>Falander made no reply. Agnes looked at him more
keenly, and all at once became aware of his thoughts.
A fleeting expression of trouble passed across her face,
as the surface of a pond is rippled by the breeze; but
she immediately regained her usual serenity, glanced
at Rehnhjelm, realized the situation, and was prepared
for anything.</p>

<p>"May we be told what important business has
brought us together here, at this early hour?" she
asked gaily, putting her hand on Falander's shoulder.</p>

<p>"Certainly," said the latter, with such firm
resolution that her face paled; but at the same
moment he threw back his head, as if he wanted to
force his thoughts into another groove, "it's my
birthday, and I want you to have breakfast with me."</p>

<p>Agnes, who had seen the train rushing straight at
her, felt relieved; she burst into merry laughter and
embraced Falander.</p>

<p>"But as breakfast has been ordered for eleven, we'll
have to wait a while. Won't you sit down?"</p>

<p>There was an ominous silence.</p>

<p>"An angel is passing through the room," said
Agnes.<span class="pagenum">[235]</span></p>

<p>"You!" said Rehnhjelm, respectfully and ardently
kissing her hand.</p>

<p>Falander looked as if he had been thrown out of
his saddle, and was making violent efforts to regain
it.</p>

<p>"I saw a spider this morning," said Rehnhjelm,
"that predicts happiness."</p>

<p>"<i>Araignée matin: chagrin</i>," said Falander. "Have
you never heard that?"</p>

<p>"What does that mean?" asked Agnes.</p>

<p>"A spider on the morrow: grief and sorrow."</p>

<p>"Hm!"</p>

<p>Again they grew silent. The only sound which
disturbed the stillness was the sound of the rain
beating in gusts against the windows.</p>

<p>"I read an awfully tragic book last night,"
presently remarked Falander. "I hardly slept a
wink."</p>

<p>"What book was that?" asked Rehnhjelm,
without betraying very much interest.</p>

<p>"Its title was 'Pierre Clément,' and its subject
the usual woman's game. But it was told so well
that it made a great impression on me."</p>

<p>"May I ask what the usual woman's game is?"
said Agnes.</p>

<p>"Faithlessness and treachery!"</p>

<p>"And this Pierre Clément?"</p>

<p>"He was, of course, betrayed. He was a young
artist, in love with another man's mistress...."</p>

<p>"I remember the book; I liked it very much.
Wasn't she later on engaged to a man whom she really
loved? Yes, that was it, and during all the time she
kept up her old <i>liaison</i>. The author wanted to show
that a woman can love in two ways; a man only in
one. That's true enough, isn't it?"</p>

<p>"Certainly! But the day came when her fiancé
was going to compete with a picture. To cut my
tale short, she gave herself to the president, and
Pierre Clément was happy and could be married."</p>

<p>"And by this the author wanted to show that a<span class="pagenum">[236]</span>
woman will sacrifice everything to the man she loves&mdash;a
man, on the other hand...."</p>

<p>"That is the most infamous statement I ever
heard!" burst out Falander.</p>

<p>He rose, went to his writing-desk, threw open the
flap and took out a black box.</p>

<p>"Here," he said, handing it to Agnes; "go home
and rid the world of a monster."</p>

<p>"What's that?" laughed Agnes, opening the box
and taking out a six-barrelled revolver. "I say,
what a sweet thing! Didn't you use this as Carl
Moor? I believe it is loaded."</p>

<p>She raised the revolver and fired up the chimney.</p>

<p>"Lock it up," she said, "this is no toy, my friends."</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm had watched the scene speechlessly.
He understood the meaning well enough, but he was
unable to say a word; and he was so much under
the girl's spell, that he could not even feel angry with
her. He realized that he had been stabbed, but he
had as yet not had time to feel the pain.</p>

<p>The girl's impudence disconcerted Falander; he
wanted time to recover; his moral execution had been
a complete failure, and his <i>coup de théâtre</i> had been
disastrous to himself.</p>

<p>"Hadn't we better go now?" asked Agnes,
straightening her hat before the glass.</p>

<p>Falander opened the door.</p>

<p>"Go and be damned to you!" he said. "You
have ruined an honest man's peace of mind."</p>

<p>"What are you talking about? Shut the door!
It's none too warm here."</p>

<p>"I see, I have to speak more plainly. Where were
you last night?"</p>

<p>"Hjalmar knows, and it's no business of yours."</p>

<p>"You were not at your aunt's! You had supper
with the manager!"</p>

<p>"It's a lie!"</p>

<p>"I saw you at nine in the vaults of the Town-hall."</p>

<p>"I say it's a lie! I was at home at that time!
Go and ask aunt's maid who saw me home." <span class="pagenum">[237]</span></p>

<p>"I should never have expected this from you!"</p>

<p>"Hadn't we better stop talking nonsense now and
be off? You shouldn't read stupid books all night;
then you wouldn't be in a bad temper on the next
day. Put on your hats and come."</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm put his hand to his head to feel whether
it was in its accustomed place, for everything seemed
to him to be turned upside down. When he found
that it was still there, he attempted to come to a
clear understanding of the matter, but he was unable
to do so.</p>

<p>"Where were you on the sixth of July?" asked
Falander, with the sternness of a judge.</p>

<p>"What an idiotic question to ask! How can I
remember what happened three months ago?"</p>

<p>"You were with me, but you told Hjalmar you
were with your aunt."</p>

<p>"Don't listen to him," said Agnes, going up to
Rehnhjelm and caressing him. "He's talking nonsense."</p>

<p>Rehnhjelm's hand shot out; he seized her by the
throat and flung her on her back behind the stove,
where she fell on a little pile of wood and remained
lying still and motionless.</p>

<p>He put on his hat, but Falander had to help him
with his coat, for he trembled violently.</p>

<p>"Come along, let's be off," he said, spitting on the
hearthstone.</p>

<p>Falander hesitated for a moment, felt Agnes' pulse
and then followed Rehnhjelm with whom he caught
up in the lower hall.</p>

<p>"I admire you!" he said; "the matter was really
beyond discussion."</p>

<p>"Then let it for ever remain so! We haven't
much time to enjoy each other's company. I am
leaving for home by the next train, to work and to
forget! Let's go to the vaults now."</p>

<p>They went to the vaults and engaged a private
room, where breakfast was served to them.</p>

<p>"Has my hair turned grey?" asked Rehnhjelm,<span class="pagenum">[238]</span>
passing his hand over his hair which was damp and
clung closely to his skull.</p>

<p>"No, old man, that doesn't often happen; even
I'm not grey."</p>

<p>"Is she hurt?"</p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>"It was in this room&mdash;I met her for the first time."</p>

<p>He rose from the table, staggered to the sofa, and
threw himself on his knees by the side of it. Burying
his head in the cushions, he burst into tears like a
child crying in his mother's lap.</p>

<p>Falander took his head in both his hands, and
Rehnhjelm felt something hot and scalding dropping
on his neck.</p>

<p>"Where's your philosophy now, old fellow? Out
with it! I'm drowning! Give me a straw to clutch
at!"</p>

<p>"Poor boy! poor old boy!"</p>

<p>"I must see her! I must ask her forgiveness! I
love her in spite of it! In spite of it! Are you sure
she isn't hurt? Oh! my God, that one can be so
unhappy and yet not die!"<br /><br /></p>



<p>At three o'clock in the afternoon Rehnhjelm left
for Stockholm. Falander slammed the carriage door
behind him and turned the handle.<span class="pagenum">[239]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXII" id="CHAPTER_XXII"></a>CHAPTER XXII</h2>

<h3>HARD TIMES</h3>


<p>To Sellén also the autumn had brought great changes.
His powerful patron had died, and all memory of him
was to be blotted out; even the memories of his kind
actions were not to survive him. That Sellén's
stipend was stopped went without saying, especially
as the artist could not bring himself to petition for
its continuance. He did not believe that he required
further assistance, after having been given a helping
hand once, and, moreover, there were so many younger
members of his profession in greater need of it.</p>

<p>But he was made to realize that not only was the
sun extinguished but that the smaller planets, too,
suffered from total eclipse. He had worked strenuously
during the summer and had made great progress
in his art, but nevertheless the president declared that
it had deteriorated, and that his success in the spring
had been nothing more than a stroke of luck; the
professor of landscape-painting had told him as a
friend that he would never be a great artist, and the
academician had seized the opportunity to rehabilitate
himself, and clung to his first opinion. In addition
to this the public taste in pictures had changed; the
ignorant wealthy handful of people who were in the
habit of buying pictures and therefore set the fashion,
did not want landscapes, but portraits of the watering-places
and summer resorts they knew; and it was
difficult to sell even these; the only demand was for
sentimental genre-pictures and half-nude figures.</p>

<p>Therefore Sellén had fallen on evil days, for he
could not bring himself to paint against his better<span class="pagenum">[240]</span>
judgment. He was now renting a former photographic
studio on the top of a house in Government
Street. The accommodation consisted of the studio
itself, with its rotten floor and leaking roof&mdash;the latter
defect was not felt at present, for it was winter and
the roof was covered with snow&mdash;and the old dark-room
which smelt of collodium, and for this reason
could only be used as a wood-or coal-shed, when
circumstances permitted the purchase of fuel. The
only piece of furniture was a wooden garden seat,
studded with protruding nails. It was so short that
a man using it as a bed&mdash;and it was always used as
a bed when the owner, or rather the borrower, spent
the night at home&mdash;had either to draw his knees up
to his chin, or allow his legs to dangle over the side.
The bedding consisted of half a rug&mdash;the other half
was at the pawnbroker's&mdash;and a leather case, stuffed
to bursting-point with studies and sketches.</p>

<p>In the dark-room was a water tap and a basin with
a waste pipe&mdash;the only substitute for a dressing-table.</p>

<p>On a cold afternoon, a short time before Christmas,
Sellén was standing before his easel, painting for the
third time a new picture on an old canvas. He had
just risen from his hard bed; no servant had come
in to light his fire&mdash;partly because he had no servant,
and partly because he had nothing with which to
make a fire&mdash;no servant had brushed his clothes
or brought his coffee. And yet he was standing
before his easel whistling merrily, engaged in painting
a brilliant sunset, when there came four knocks
at the door. Sellén opened without hesitation and
admitted Olle Montanus, very plainly and very lightly
clad, without an overcoat.</p>

<p>"Good morning, Olle! How are you? Did you
sleep well?"</p>

<p>"Thanks."</p>

<p>"How's the cash-box?"</p>

<p>"Oh! Bad!"</p>

<p>"And the notes?"</p>

<p>"There are so few in circulation." <span class="pagenum">[241]</span></p>

<p>"I see! They won't issue any more? And the
valuables?"</p>

<p>"There aren't any."</p>

<p>"Do you think it's going to be a hard winter?"</p>

<p>"I saw a great many chatterers this morning;
that means a hard winter."</p>

<p>"You took a morning stroll?"</p>

<p>"I've walked about all night, after leaving the
Red Room at midnight."</p>

<p>"You were at the Red Room last night?"</p>

<p>"Yes; and I made two new acquaintances: Dr.
Borg and a man called Levin."</p>

<p>"Oh! Those rascals! I know them! Why didn't
you spend the night with them?"</p>

<p>"They turned up their noses at me because I had
no overcoat, and I felt ashamed. But I am worn
out; I'll rest for a few moments on your sofa! I've
walked through the whole town and round half of
it; I must try and get work to-day at a stone-mason's
or I shall starve."</p>

<p>"Is it true that you are a member of the Workmen's
Union 'Star of the North'?"</p>

<p>"Quite true; I'm going to lecture there on Sunday
next, on Sweden."</p>

<p>"A good subject! Plenty to say!"</p>

<p>"If I should fall asleep on your sofa, don't waken
me; I'm dead-beat."</p>

<p>"All right, old chap! Go to sleep!"</p>

<p>A few moments later Olle was fast asleep and snoring
loudly. His head was hanging over one of the side-railings
which supported his thick neck, and his legs
over the other.</p>

<p>"Poor devil!" muttered Sellén, covering him up
with his rug.</p>

<p>There was another knock, but as it was unfamiliar
Sellén judged it wise to take no notice of it; thereupon
the clamour became so furious that it dissipated his
apprehensions and he opened the door to Dr. Borg and
Levin. Borg was the first to speak.</p>

<p>"Is Falk here?" <span class="pagenum">[242]</span></p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>"Who is that sack of wood over there?" continued
Borg, pointing at Olle with his snow-boot.</p>

<p>"Olle Montanus."</p>

<p>"Oh! That extraordinary fellow who was with
Falk last night! Is he asleep?"</p>

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"Did he spend the night here?"</p>

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"Why haven't you a fire? It's beastly cold."</p>

<p>"Because I have no wood."</p>

<p>"Send for some then! Where's the servant? I'll
make her trot."</p>

<p>"Gone to early service."</p>

<p>"Wake up that sleeping ox over there and send
him!"</p>

<p>"No, let him sleep," objected Sellén, covering up
Olle, who was still snoring loudly.</p>

<p>"Then I must show you another way. What's the
floor-packing? Earth or rubbish?"</p>

<p>"I don't understand these matters," replied Sellén,
carefully stepping on some sheets of cardboard which
were lying on the floor.</p>

<p>"Have you got another piece of cardboard?"</p>

<p>"What are you driving at?" asked Sellén, colouring
up to the roots of his hair.</p>

<p>"I want it, and a pair of fire-tongs."</p>

<p>Sellén gave him the required articles, took his
sketching stool and sat down on the pieces of cardboard
as if he were guarding a treasure.</p>

<p>Borg took off his coat, and with the help of the
fire-tongs loosened a board in the floor, rotted by rain
and acids.</p>

<p>"Confound you! What are you doing?" exclaimed
Sellén.</p>

<p>"I used to do this in my college days at Upsala,"
said Borg.</p>

<p>"But you can't do that sort of thing at Stockholm!"</p>

<p>"Hang it all, I'm cold! I must have a fire." <span class="pagenum">[243]</span></p>

<p>"But there's no necessity to break up the floor in
the middle of the room! It shows too much!"</p>

<p>"What does that matter to me! I don't live here.
But this is too hard."</p>

<p>Meanwhile he had approached Sellén, and all of a
sudden he pushed him and the stool over; in falling
the artist dragged the pieces of cardboard with him,
exposing the bare floor-packing underneath.</p>

<p>"Miscreant! To have a perfect timber-yard and
not to say a word about it!"</p>

<p>"The rain's done it!"</p>

<p>"I don't care who's done it! Let's light a fire!"</p>

<p>He wrenched off a few pieces of wood with his strong
hands and soon a fire was blazing in the grate.</p>

<p>Levin had watched the scene, quiet, neutral, and
polite. Borg sat down before the fire and made the
tongs red-hot.</p>

<p>Again there was a knock: three short raps and a
longer one.</p>

<p>"That's Falk," said Sellén, opening the door.</p>

<p>Falk entered, looking a little hectic.</p>

<p>"Do you want money?" said Borg to the newcomer,
laying his hand on his breast-pocket.</p>

<p>"What a question to ask," said Falk, looking at
him doubtfully.</p>

<p>"How much do you want? I can let you have it."</p>

<p>"Are you serious?" asked Falk, and his face cleared.</p>

<p>"Serious? Hm! How much? The figure! The
amount!"</p>

<p>"I could do with, say, sixty crowns."</p>

<p>"Good Lord, how modest you are," remarked Borg,
and turned to Levin.</p>

<p>"Yes, it <i>is</i> very little," said the latter. "Take as
much as you can get Falk while the purse is open."</p>

<p>"I'd rather not! Sixty crowns is all I want, and
I can't afford to take up a bigger loan. But how is it
to be paid back?"</p>

<p>"Twelve crowns every sixth month, twenty-four
crowns per annum, in two instalments," said Levin
promptly and firmly.<span class="pagenum">[244]</span></p>

<p>"Those are easy terms," replied Falk. "Where do
you get money on those terms?"</p>

<p>"From the Wheelwrights' Bank. Give me paper
and a pen, Levin!"</p>

<p>Quick as lightning Levin produced a promissory
note, a pen, and a pocket inkstand. The note had
already been filled up by the others. When Falk saw
the figure eight hundred he hesitated for a moment.</p>

<p>"Eight hundred crowns?" he asked.</p>

<p>"You can have more if you are not satisfied."</p>

<p>"No, I won't; it's all the same who takes the
money as long as it is paid up all right. But can you
raise money on a bill of this sort, without security?"</p>

<p>"Without security? You are forgetting that we
are guaranteeing it," replied Levin, with contemptuous
familiarity.</p>

<p>"I don't want to depreciate it," observed Falk.
"I'm grateful for your guarantees, but I don't believe
that the bill will be accepted."</p>

<p>"Oh, won't it! It's accepted already," said Borg,
bringing out a <i>bill of acceptance</i>, as he called it. "Go
on, Falk, sign!"</p>

<p>Falk signed his name.</p>

<p>Borg and Levin were watching him, looking over his
shoulders like policemen.</p>

<p>"Assessor," dictated Borg.</p>

<p>"No, I'm a journalist," objected Falk.</p>

<p>"That's no good; you are registered as assessor,
and as such you still figure in the directory."</p>

<p>"Did you look it up?"</p>

<p>"One should be correct in matters of form," said
Borg gravely.</p>

<p>Falk signed.</p>

<p>"Come here, Sellén, and witness," commanded Borg.</p>

<p>"I don't know whether I ought to," replied Sellén,
"I've seen at home, in the country, so much misery
arising from such signatures...."</p>

<p>"You are not in the country now, and you are
not dealing with peasants. There's no reason why
you shouldn't witness that Falk's signature is genuine." <span class="pagenum">[245]</span></p>

<p>Sellén signed, shaking his head.</p>

<p>"And now rouse that draught-ox over there and
make him, too, witness the signature."</p>

<p>When all shaking was in vain Borg took the tongs,
which were now red-hot, and held them under the
sleeper's nostrils.</p>

<p>"Wake up, you dog, and you shall have something
to eat!"</p>

<p>Olle jumped up and rubbed his eyes.</p>

<p>"You are to witness Falk's signature. Do you
understand?"</p>

<p>Olle took the pen and wrote his name in obedience
to the two guarantors' dictation. When he had done
so, he turned to the bench to lie down again but Borg
prevented him.</p>

<p>"Wait a minute," he said, "Falk must first sign a
counter-guarantee."</p>

<p>"Don't do it, Falk," said Olle; "it'll end badly,
there'll be trouble."</p>

<p>"Silence, you dog," bellowed Borg. "Come here,
Falk! We've just guaranteed your bill, as you know;
all we want now from you is a counter-guarantee in
place of Struve's, against whom an action has been
brought."</p>

<p>"What do you mean by a counter-guarantee?"</p>

<p>"It's only a matter of form; the loan was for eight
hundred crowns on the Painters' Bank; the first
payment has been made, but now that Struve has
been proceeded against, we must find a substitute.
It's a safe old loan and there are no risks; the money
was due a year ago."</p>

<p>Falk signed and the other two witnessed.</p>

<p>Borg carefully folded the bills and gave them to
Levin who immediately turned to go.</p>

<p>"I'll give you an hour," said Borg. "If you are not
back with the money by then, I'll set the police on
your track."</p>

<p>And satisfied with his morning's work, he stretched
himself out on the seat on which Olle had been
lying.<span class="pagenum">[246]</span></p>

<p>The latter staggered to the fire, lay down on the
floor and curled himself up like a dog.</p>

<p>For a little while nobody spoke.</p>

<p>"I say, Olle," said Sellén presently, breaking the
silence, "supposing we signed a bill of this sort...."</p>

<p>"You would be sent to Rindö," said Borg.</p>

<p>"What is Rindö?" asked Sellén.</p>

<p>"A convict prison in the Skerries; but in case the
gentlemen should prefer the Lake of Mälar, there's a
prison there called Longholm."</p>

<p>"But seriously," said Falk, "what happens if
one can't pay on the day when the money falls due?"</p>

<p>"One takes up a fresh loan at the Tailors' Bank, for
instance," replied Borg.</p>

<p>"Why don't you go to the Imperial Bank?"
questioned Falk.</p>

<p>"Because it's rotten!" answered Borg.</p>

<p>"Can you make head or tail out of all this?" said
Sellén to Olle.</p>

<p>"I don't understand a word of it," answered the
latter.</p>

<p>"You will, when you are members of the Academy,
and your names appear in the Directory." <span class="pagenum">[247]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXIII" id="CHAPTER_XXIII"></a>CHAPTER XXIII</h2>

<h3>AUDIENCES</h3>


<p>Nicholas Falk was sitting in his office; it was the
morning of the day before Christmas Eve. He was a
little changed; time had thinned his fair hair, and the
passions had delved little channels in his face, for the
acids which the parched soil distilled. He was stooping
over a little book of the shape and size of the
Catechism, and his busy pen seemed to prick out
designs.</p>

<p>There was a knock at the door; immediately the
book disappeared beneath the flap of his writing-desk,
and was replaced by the morning paper. Falk was
absorbed in its perusal when his wife entered.</p>

<p>"Take a seat," he said, politely.</p>

<p>"No, thank you; I'm in a hurry. Have you read
the morning paper?"</p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>"But you are reading it at this very minute!"</p>

<p>"I've only just taken it up."</p>

<p>"Have you seen the review of Arvid's poems?"</p>

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"Well? They were much praised."</p>

<p>"He wrote the review himself."</p>

<p>"You said the same thing last night when you were
reading the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>."</p>

<p>"What have you come here for?"</p>

<p>"I've just met the admiral's wife; she's accepted
our invitation and said she would be delighted to meet
the young poet."</p>

<p>"Did she really?"</p>

<p>"She did, indeed." <span class="pagenum">[248]</span></p>

<p>"Hm! Of course it's possible to make a mistake,
although I don't admit that I made one. I suppose
you're again wanting money?"</p>

<p>"Again? How long ago is it since you gave me
any?"</p>

<p>"Here you are, then! But now go, and don't
bother me again before Christmas; you know it's
been a bad year."</p>

<p>"Indeed! I don't know that at all! Everybody
says it's been a splendid year."</p>

<p>"For the agriculturist yes, but not for the insurance
societies. Run away now!"</p>

<p>Mrs. Falk went, making way for Fritz Levin, who
entered cautiously, as if he were afraid of a trap.</p>

<p>"What have you come for?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"Oh, I just wanted to wish you a good morning in
passing."</p>

<p>"A good idea! I've been wanting to see you."</p>

<p>"Have you really?"</p>

<p>"You know young Levi?"</p>

<p>"Of course I do!"</p>

<p>"Read this paper, aloud, please!"</p>

<p>Levin read, in a loud voice: "Magnificent bequest:
With a generosity which is not now infrequently met
with among the merchant class, the wholesale merchant
Mr. Charles Nicholas Falk, in order to commemorate
the anniversary of a happy marriage, has
bequeathed to the crèche 'Bethlehem' the sum of
twenty thousand crowns, one half of it to be paid at
once, and the other half after the death of the
generous donor. The bequest is all the more significant
as Mrs. Falk is one of the founders of the philanthropic
institution."</p>

<p>"Will that do?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"Splendidly! The new year will bring you the
order of Vasa!"</p>

<p>"I want you to take the deed of gift and the money
to the Administrative Committee of the crèche, that
is to say, to my wife, and then go and find young Levi.
Do you understand?" <span class="pagenum">[249]</span></p>

<p>"Quite."</p>

<p>Falk gave him the deed of gift, written on parchment,
and the amount.</p>

<p>"Count the money to see whether it is right."</p>

<p>Levin opened a packet of papers and stared, wide-eyed,
at fifty sheets covered with lithographic designs,
in all possible colours.</p>

<p>"Is that money?" he asked.</p>

<p>"These are securities," answered Falk; "fifty
shares at two hundred crowns each in the 'Triton,'
which I bequeath to the crèche Bethlehem."</p>

<p>"Haha! It's all over with the 'Triton,' then,
and the rats are leaving the sinking ship!"</p>

<p>"I didn't say that," replied Falk, laughing
maliciously.</p>

<p>"But if it should be the case, the crèche will be
bankrupt."</p>

<p>"That doesn't concern me, and it concerns you even
less. But there is something else I want you to do.
You must&mdash;you know what I mean when I say you
must...."</p>

<p>"I know, I know, bailiffs, promissory notes&mdash;go
on!"</p>

<p>"You must induce Arvid to come here to dinner on
Bank Holiday...."</p>

<p>"It will be about as easy as bringing you three
hairs out of the giant's beard. Now do you admit
that I was wise when I refused to give him your
message of last spring? Haven't I always predicted
this?"</p>

<p>"Did you? Well, never mind, hold your tongue
and do as you are told! So much for that! There's
another thing! I have noticed symptoms of remorse
in my wife. She must have met her mother, or one
of her sisters. Christmas is a sentimental season.
Go to my mother-in-law and stir up a little strife!"</p>

<p>"A very unpleasant commission!"</p>

<p>"Off you go! Next man...."</p>

<p>Levin went. The next visitor was schoolmaster
Nyström, who was admitted by a secret door in the<span class="pagenum">[250]</span>
background. At his entrance the morning paper was
dropped, and the long, narrow book reappeared.</p>

<p>Nyström had gone to pieces. His body was reduced
to a third of its former size, and his clothes were
extremely shabby. He remained humbly standing at
the door, took a much-used pocket-book out of his
pocket and waited.</p>

<p>"Ready?" asked Falk, keeping the place in the
book with his first finger.</p>

<p>"Ready," replied Nyström, opening the pocket-book.</p>

<p>"No. 26. Lieutenant Kling, 1500 crowns. Paid?"</p>

<p>"Not paid."</p>

<p>"Prolong, with extra interest and commission.
Call at his private address."</p>

<p>"Never receives at home."</p>

<p>"Threaten him by post with a visit at the
barracks."</p>

<p>"No. 27. Judge Dahlberg, 800 crowns. Let's see.
Son of the wholesale merchant Dahlberg, estimated at
35,000. Grant a respite at present, but see that he
pays the interest. Keep an eye on him."</p>

<p>"He never pays the interest."</p>

<p>"Send him a postcard to his office."</p>

<p>"No. 28. Captain Stjernborst, 4000. Good for
nothing fellow, that! Paid?"</p>

<p>"Not paid."</p>

<p>"Good. Instructions: Call on him at noon at the
guards room. Dress&mdash;you that is&mdash;compromisingly.
Your red overcoat with the yellow seams, you know
what I mean."</p>

<p>"No use! I've called on him at the guards room
in the depth of the winter without any overcoat."</p>

<p>"Then go to his guarantors!"</p>

<p>"I've been and they told me to go to hell. They
said that a guarantee was only a matter of form."</p>

<p>"Then call on him on a Wednesday afternoon at one
o'clock at the offices of the 'Triton'; take Andersson
with you, then there'll be two of you."</p>

<p>"Been done already." <span class="pagenum">[251]</span></p>

<p>"Has it? How did the directors take it?" asked
Falk, rising.</p>

<p>"They were embarrassed."</p>

<p>"Really? Much embarrassed?"</p>

<p>"Much embarrassed."</p>

<p>"And he himself?"</p>

<p>"He took us into the corridor and promised to pay
if we never called on him there again."</p>

<p>"Indeed! He spends two hours a week there, and
receives six thousand crowns, because his name is
Stjernborst. Let's see! It's Saturday to-day. Be
at the 'Triton' punctually at half-past twelve; if
you should see me there, which I expect you will, not
a flicker of an eyelid. Do you understand? Right!
Any fresh business?"</p>

<p>"Thirty-five new requests."</p>

<p>"Yes, yes, it's Christmas Eve to-morrow."</p>

<p>Falk turned over a bundle of promissory notes;
every now and then he smiled, or muttered a word.</p>

<p>"Good Heavens! Has he come to that? And
this one&mdash;and that one&mdash;who was looked upon as such
a steady fellow! Yes, yes&mdash;hard times are in store
for all of us. Oh! He, too, wants money? Then I
shall buy his house...."</p>

<p>Another knock at the door. The desk was closed,
papers and catechism vanished into thin air, and
Nyström disappeared through the secret door.</p>

<p>"At half-past twelve," whispered Falk, as he went.
"One thing more! Have you finished the poem?"</p>

<p>"Yes," replied a muffled voice.</p>

<p>"Right! Keep Levin's promissory note in readiness,
so that it can be submitted to his head office at
any time. Some day I shall smash him. The rascal's
deceitful."</p>

<p>He arranged his tie, pulled out his cuffs and opened
the door leading to a little waiting-room.</p>

<p>"Ah! Good morning, Mr. Lundell! Very glad
to see you! Please come in! How are you? I had
locked my door for a few moments."</p>

<p>It really was Lundell; Lundell dressed in the<span class="pagenum">[252]</span>
height of fashion like a shop assistant; he wore a
watch-chain, rings, gloves and overshoes.</p>

<p>"I am not calling at an inconvenient time, I
hope?"</p>

<p>"Not at all! Do you think, Mr. Lundell, that you
will be able to finish it by to-morrow?"</p>

<p>"Must it be finished by to-morrow?"</p>

<p>"It absolutely must! It will be a red-letter day
for the crèche to-morrow; Mrs. Falk will publicly
present my portrait to the institution, to be hung in
the dining-room."</p>

<p>"Then we must not let any obstacles stand in our
way," replied Lundell, taking an easel and an almost
finished canvas from a cupboard. "If you will sit
to me for a few moments, sir, I will give the picture
the finishing touches."</p>

<p>"With all the pleasure in the world."</p>

<p>Falk sat down in a chair, crossed his legs, threw
himself into the attitude of a statesman and tried to
look aristocratic.</p>

<p>"Won't you talk, sir? Although your face is an
exceedingly interesting one when at rest, yet the more
characteristics I can bring out, the better."</p>

<p>Falk smirked; a glimmer of pleasure and gratification
lit up his coarse features.</p>

<p>"I hope you'll be able to dine with us on bank
holiday, Mr. Lundell?"</p>

<p>"Thank you...."</p>

<p>"You'll be able to study the faces of many men of
distinction, then, men whose features deserve being
fixed on canvas far more than mine do."</p>

<p>"Perhaps I may have the honour of painting
them?"</p>

<p>"You will, if I recommend you."</p>

<p>"Oh, do you really think so?"</p>

<p>"Certainly I do!"</p>

<p>"I just caught a new expression in your face. Try
and keep it for a few moments. There! This is
excellent! I'm afraid I shall have to work at this
portrait all day long. There are so many details<span class="pagenum">[253]</span>
which one only discovers gradually. Your face is rich
in interesting features."</p>

<p>"In that case we had better dine together! We
must see a good deal of each other, Mr. Lundell, so
that you may have an opportunity of studying my
face for a second edition, which it is always well to
have. Really, I must say, there are few people to
whom I felt so strongly drawn from the first moment,
as I did to you, Mr. Lundell."</p>

<p>"Oh, my dear sir!"</p>

<p>"And let me tell you that my eyes are keen and
well able to distinguish truth from flattery."</p>

<p>"I knew that from the first," answered Lundell
unscrupulously. "My profession has given me an
insight into human character."</p>

<p>"You are a very keen observer indeed. Not
everybody understands me. My wife, for instance...."</p>

<p>"Oh! Women cannot be expected...."</p>

<p>"No, that wasn't altogether what I meant. But
may I offer you a glass of good old port?"</p>

<p>"Thank you, sir; I never drink when I'm working,
on principle...."</p>

<p>"Quite right! I respect this principle&mdash;I always
respect principles&mdash;all the more because I share it."</p>

<p>"But when I'm not at work, I enjoy a glass."</p>

<p>"Just as I do."</p>

<p>It struck half-past twelve. Falk rose.</p>

<p>"Excuse me, I must leave you for a short time, on
business. I shall be back almost immediately."</p>

<p>"Certainly, business first."</p>

<p>Falk put on his hat and coat and went. Lundell
was left alone.</p>

<p>He lit a cigar and studied the portrait. No
observer, however keen, could have guessed his
thoughts; he had acquired sufficient knowledge of
the art of life to hide his opinions even when he was
alone; nay, more than that, he was afraid of coming
to a clear understanding with himself.<span class="pagenum">[254]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXIV" id="CHAPTER_XXIV"></a>CHAPTER XXIV</h2>

<h3>ON SWEDEN</h3>


<p>They had arrived at the dessert. The champagne
sparkled in the glasses which reflected the rays of
light from the chandelier in Nicholas Falk's dining-room.
Arvid was greeted on all sides with friendly
hand-shakes, compliments and congratulations, warnings
and advice; everybody wanted to be present
and share in his triumph, for he had had a decided
success.</p>

<p>"Assessor Falk! I'm delighted!" said the President
of the Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries,
nodding to him across the table. "I fully appreciate
your talent."</p>

<p>Arvid tranquilly pocketed the insulting compliment.</p>

<p>"Why are your poems so melancholy?" asked a
young beauty on the poet's right. "One might almost
think you were suffering from an unhappy love-affair."</p>

<p>"Assessor Falk, allow me to drink your health,"
said the chief editor of the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>, from the left,
stroking his long, blond beard. "Why don't you
write for my paper?"</p>

<p>"I shouldn't think you would print my articles,"
replied Arvid.</p>

<p>"I don't see why we shouldn't."</p>

<p>"Our opinions differ so very widely...."</p>

<p>"Oh! That isn't half as bad as you think. One
compromises. We have no opinions."</p>

<p>"Your health, Falk!" shouted the excited Lundell,
from the other side of the table. "Your health!"</p>

<p>Levi and Borg had to hold him, otherwise he would<span class="pagenum">[255]</span>
have risen and made a speech. It was for the first
time that Lundell was invited to a dinner of this sort,
and the brilliant assembly and luxurious food and
drink intoxicated him; but as all the guests were
more or less merry, he fortunately excited no unpleasant
attention.</p>

<p>Arvid Falk's heart beat faster at the sight of all
these people who had readmitted him to their circle
without asking for explanations or apologies. It gave
him a sense of security to sit on those old chairs, which
had been a part of the home of his childhood. With
a feeling of melancholy he recognized the tall table-centre
which in the old times had only seen daylight
once a year. But the number of new people distracted
him; their friendly faces did not deceive him;
certainly they did not wish him evil, but their friendship
depended on a combination of circumstances.</p>

<p>Moreover, he saw the whole entertainment in the
light of a masquerade. What mutual interest could
possibly form a bond between his uncultured brother
and Professor Borg, the man with the great scientific
reputation? They were shareholders in the same
company! What was the proud Captain Gyllenborst
doing here? Had he come for the sake of the dinner?
Impossible, even though a man will go a long way for
the sake of a good dinner. And the President? The
Admiral? There must have been invisible ties, strong,
unbreakable ties perhaps.</p>

<p>The mirth increased, but the laughter was too
shrill; the lips were overflowing with wit, but the
wit was biting. Falk felt ill at ease; it seemed to
him that his father's eyes were looking angrily at the
assembly from the painted canvas which hung over
the piano.</p>

<p>Nicholas Falk beamed with satisfaction; he neither
saw nor heard any unpleasantness, but he avoided
meeting his brother's eyes as much as possible. They
had not spoken to each other yet, for Arvid, in compliance
with Levin's instructions, had not arrived
until after all the guests had been assembled.<span class="pagenum">[256]</span></p>

<p>The dinner was approaching its end. Nicholas
made a speech on "the stamina and firm resolution"
which are necessary to accomplish a man's purpose:
the achievement of financial independence and a good
social position. "These two qualities," said the
speaker, "raise a man's self-respect and endow him
with that firmness without which his efforts are
unavailing, at any rate as far as the general good is
concerned. And the general welfare, gentlemen,
must always be our highest endeavour; I have no
doubt that&mdash;if the truth were known&mdash;it is the ambition
of every one here present. I drink the health of
all those who have this day honoured my house, and
I hope that I may often&mdash;in the future&mdash;enjoy the
same privilege."</p>

<p>Captain Gyllenborst, who was slightly intoxicated,
replied in a lengthy, facetious speech which, delivered
at a different house, before people in a different mood,
would have been called scandalous.</p>

<p>He abused the commercial spirit which was spreading,
and declared that he had plenty of self-respect,
although he was by no means financially independent;
he had been obliged, this very morning, to settle some
business of a most disagreeable nature&mdash;but in spite
of this he had sufficient strength of character to be
present at the banquet; and as far as his social position
was concerned, it was second to none&mdash;he felt
sure that this was everybody's opinion, for otherwise
he would not be sitting at this table, the guest of so
charming a host.</p>

<p>When he had concluded, the party drew a breath
of relief. "It was as if a thundercloud had passed
over our heads," remarked the beauty, and Arvid
Falk heartily agreed.</p>

<p>There was so much humbug, so much deceit in the
atmosphere that Arvid longed to take his leave.
These people, who appeared so honest and respectable,
seemed to be held by an invisible chain at
which they tore every now and then with suppressed
fury. Captain Gyllenborst treated his host with open,<span class="pagenum">[257]</span>
though facetious contempt. He smoked a cigar in the
drawing-room, generally behaved like a boor, and
took no notice whatever of the ladies. He spat in
the fire-place, mercilessly criticized the oleographs on
the walls, and loudly expressed his contempt for the
mahogany furniture. The other gentlemen were
indifferent; they gave Falk the impression that they
were on duty.</p>

<p>Irritated and upset, he left the party unnoticed.</p>

<p>In the street below stood Olle waiting for him.</p>

<p>"I really didn't think you would come," said Olle.
"It's so beautifully light up there."</p>

<p>"What a reason! I wish you'd been there!"</p>

<p>"How is Lundell getting on in smart society?"</p>

<p>"Don't envy him. He won't have an easy time
if he's going to make his way as a portrait-painter.
But let's talk of something else. I have been longing
for this evening, so as to study the working man at
close quarters. It will be like a breath of fresh air
after these deadly fumes; I feel as if I were allowed
to take a stroll in the wood, after having long been
laid up in a hospital. I wonder whether I shall be
disillusioned."</p>

<p>"The working man is suspicious; you will have
to be careful."</p>

<p>"Is he generous? Free from pettiness? Or has
the pressure which has lain on him for so long spoiled
him?"</p>

<p>"You'll be able to see for yourself. Most things
in this world differ from our expectations."</p>

<p>"That's true, unfortunately."</p>

<p>Half an hour later they had arrived in the great
hall of the working men's union "Star of the
North." The place was already crowded. Arvid's
black dress-coat did not create a good impression;
he caught many an unfriendly glance from angry
eyes.</p>

<p>Olle introduced Arvid to a tall, gaunt man with a
face full of passion, who seemed to be troubled with
an incessant cough.<span class="pagenum">[258]</span></p>

<p>"Joiner Eriksson!"</p>

<p>"That's me," said the latter, "and is this one of
those gentlemen who want to put up for election?
He doesn't look big enough for that."</p>

<p>"No, no," said Olle, "he's here for the newspaper."</p>

<p>"Which newspaper? There are so many different
sorts. Perhaps he's come to make fun of us?"</p>

<p>"No, no, nothing of the sort," said Olle. "He's a
friend, and he'll do all he can for you."</p>

<p>"I see! That alters the matter. But I don't
trust those gentlemen; one of them lived with us,
that is to say, we lived in the same house, in the
White Mountains; he was the landlord's agent&mdash;Struve
was the rascal's name."</p>

<p>There was a rap with the hammer. The chair was
taken by an elderly man, Wheelwright Löfgren,
alderman and holder of the medal <i>Litteris et artibus</i>.
He had held many offices and acquired a great deal
of dramatic routine. A certain venerability, capable
of quelling storms and silencing noisy meetings,
characterized him. His broad face, ornamented by
side-whiskers and a pair of spectacles, was framed by
a judge's wig.</p>

<p>The secretary who sat at his side was one of the
supernumeraries of the great Board of Functionaries;
he wore eye-glasses and expressed with a peasant's
grin his dissatisfaction with everything that was
said.</p>

<p>The front bench was filled by the most aristocratic
members of the Union: officers, Government officials,
wholesale merchants; they supported all loyal resolutions,
and with their superior parliamentary skill
voted against every attempt at reform.</p>

<p>The secretary read the minutes, which the front
bench approved.</p>

<p>Next the first item of the agenda was read:</p>

<p>"The Preparatory Committee would suggest that
the working men's union 'Star of the North' should
express the dissatisfaction which every right-thinking
citizen must feel in regard to the unlawful movements<span class="pagenum">[259]</span>
which under the name of strikes are spreading nearly
all over Europe."</p>

<p>"Is this the pleasure of the Union?"</p>

<p>"Yes, yes!" shouted the front bench.</p>

<p>"Mr. President!" called out the joiner from the
White Mountains.</p>

<p>"Who is making so much noise at the back?"
asked the chairman, looking over his spectacles with
a face which suggested that he would presently have
recourse to the cane.</p>

<p>"Nobody is making any noise; I am asking for
permission to speak."</p>

<p>"Who is I?"</p>

<p>"Master-joiner Eriksson."</p>

<p>"Are you a master? Since when?"</p>

<p>"I am a journeyman out of my time; I have
never had the means to be made free of the city, but
I am every bit as skilful as any other master and I
work on my own account."</p>

<p>"I request the journeyman-joiner Eriksson to sit
down and stop interfering. Is it the pleasure of the
Union to reply to the question in the affirmative?"</p>

<p>"Mr. Chairman!"</p>

<p>"What is the matter?"</p>

<p>"I ask permission to speak! Let me speak!"
bellowed Eriksson.</p>

<p>There was a murmur on the back benches: "Eriksson's
turn to speak."</p>

<p>"Journeyman Eriksson&mdash;do you spell your name
with an x or a z?" asked the chairman, prompted by
the secretary.</p>

<p>The front bench shook with laughter.</p>

<p>"I don't spell, gentlemen, I discuss," said the
joiner with blazing eyes. "I discuss, I say. If I
had the gift of making speeches, I should show you
that the strikers are right; for if masters and principals
grow fat because they have nothing to do but
to fawn and cringe at levees, and similar ceremonies,
the working man must pay the piper with his sweat.
We know why you won't pay us just wages; it's<span class="pagenum">[260]</span>
because we should get the Parliamentary vote, and
that's what you are afraid of...."</p>

<p>"Mr. Chairman!"</p>

<p>"Captain von Sporn!"</p>

<p>"Mr. Chairman, gentlemen! It is much to be
regretted that at a meeting of this Union, which has
a reputation for dignified conduct (last displayed at
the Royal wedding), people without the smallest trace
of Parliamentary tact should be permitted to compromise
a respectable society by a shameless and
reckless contempt of all seemliness. Believe me,
gentlemen, such a thing could never have happened
in a country where from early youth military discipline...."</p>

<p>"Conscription," said Eriksson to Olle.</p>

<p>"... had been the rule; where the habit of controlling
oneself and others had been acquired! I
believe I am expressing the general feeling of the
meeting when I say that I hope that such a distressing
scene may never again occur amongst us. I say us&mdash;for
I, too, am a working man&mdash;we all are in the sight
of the Eternal&mdash;and I say it as a member of this Union.
The day would be a day of mourning when I should
find myself compelled to withdraw the words which I
recently uttered at another meeting (it was at the
meeting of the National League of Promoters of
Conscription), the words: 'I have a high opinion of
the Swedish working man.'"</p>

<p>"Hear, hear! Hear, hear!"</p>

<p>"Does the meeting accept the suggestion of the
Preparatory Committee?"</p>

<p>"Yes! Yes!"</p>

<p>"Second item: At the instigation of several
members of the Union, the Preparatory Committee
submit to the meeting the proposal to collect a sum,
not exceeding three thousand crowns, as a testimonial
to the Duke of Dalsland at his forthcoming confirmation.
The gift is to be an expression of the gratitude
of the working man to the Royal Family and, more
especially, of his disapproval of those working men's<span class="pagenum">[261]</span>
disturbances which under the name of 'Commune'
devastated the French capital."</p>

<p>"Mr. Chairman!"</p>

<p>"Doctor Haberfeld!"</p>

<p>"No, it's I, Eriksson; I ask permission to say a
few words."</p>

<p>"Oh! Well! Eriksson has permission to
speak."</p>

<p>"I merely want to point out that not the working
men, but officials, lawyers, officers&mdash;conscripts&mdash;and
journalists were to blame for the Commune at Paris.
If I had the gift of making speeches, I should ask
those gentlemen to express their ideas in an album
of confessions."</p>

<p>"Does the meeting agree to the proposal?"</p>

<p>"Yes, yes!"</p>

<p>And the clerks began to write and to check and to
chatter, exactly as they had done at the Parliamentary
meetings.</p>

<p>"Are things always managed in this way?" asked
Falk.</p>

<p>"Don't you think it amusing, sir?" said Eriksson.
"It's enough to turn one's hair grey. I call it corruption
and treachery. Nothing but meanness and
selfishness. There isn't a man amongst them who has
the cause really at heart. And therefore the things
which must happen will happen."</p>

<p>"What things?"</p>

<p>"We'll see!" said the joiner, taking Olle's hand.
"Are you ready? Hold your own ground, you'll be
sharply criticized."</p>

<p>Olle nodded slyly.</p>

<p>"Stonemason, journeyman, Olle Montanus has
announced a lecture on Sweden; the subject is a big
one. But if he will promise not to exceed half an
hour, we will hear what he has got to say. What do
you say, gentlemen?"</p>

<p>"Hear! Hear!"</p>

<p>"If you please, Mr. Montanus."</p>

<p>Olle shook himself like a dog about to jump, and<span class="pagenum">[262]</span>
threaded his way through the assembly, who examined
him with curious eyes.</p>

<p>The chairman began a brief conversation with the
front bench, and the secretary yawned before taking
up a newspaper, to show the meeting that he, for one,
was not going to listen.</p>

<p>Olle stepped on the platform, lowered his heavy
eyelids and moved his jaws, pretending to be speaking;
when the room had grown really silent, so silent
that everybody could hear what the chairman said
to the captain, he began:</p>

<p>"On Sweden. Some points of view."</p>

<p>And after a pause:</p>

<p>"Gentlemen! It might be more than an unfounded
supposition to say that the most productive idea and
the most vigorous striving of our times is the suppression
of short-sighted patriotism, which divides
nations and pits them against one another as foes;
we have seen the means used to gain this object,
namely, international exhibitions and their results:
honorary diplomas."</p>

<p>The audience looked puzzled. "What's he driving
at?" said Eriksson. "It's rather unexpected, but
it sounds all right."</p>

<p>"Now, as in the past, Sweden marches at the head
of civilization; she has more than any other nation
spread the cosmopolitan ideal, and if one may rely
on statistics, she has attained a great deal. Exceptionally
favourable circumstances have contributed
to this result. I will examine them shortly, and then
pass on to lighter subjects such as the form of government,
the ground-tax, and so on."</p>

<p>"It's going to be rather long," said Eriksson,
nudging Arvid, "but he's an amusing chap."</p>

<p>"Sweden, as everybody knows, was originally a
German colony, and the Swedish language, which has
been preserved fairly pure to our days, is neither more
nor less than Low-German and its twelve dialects.
This circumstance&mdash;I mean the difficulty of communicating
with one another, experienced by the pro<span class="pagenum">[263]</span>vinces&mdash;has
been a powerful factor in counteracting
the development of that unhealthy national feeling.
Other fortunate facts have opposed a one-sided
German influence which had reached its pinnacle
when Sweden became a German province under
Albrecht of Mecklenburg. The foremost of these
facts is the conquest of the Danish provinces: Scania,
Halland, Bleking, Bohuslän, and Dalsland; Sweden's
richest provinces are inhabited by Danes who still
speak the language of their country and refuse to
acknowledge the Swedish rule."</p>

<p>"What in the name of fortune is he getting at?
Is he mad?"</p>

<p>"The inhabitants of Scania, for instance, to this
day look upon Copenhagen as their capital, and
constitute the opposition in Parliament. The same
thing applies to the Danish Göteborg, which does not
acknowledge Stockholm as the capital of the realm.
An English settlement has sprung up there and
English influence is predominant. These people, the
English people, fish in the waters near the coast, and
during the winter very nearly all the wholesale trade
is in their hands; they return to their own country
in the summer and enjoy their winter profits in their
villas in the Scotch Highlands. Very excellent
people, though! They have even their own newspaper,
in which they commend their own actions,
without, it must be admitted, blaming those of
others.</p>

<p>"Immigration is another factor of the utmost
importance. We have the Fins in the Finnish forests,
but we also have them in the capital, where they took
refuge when the political situation drove them out of
their own country. In all our more important iron-works
you will find a fair number of Walloons; they
came over in the seventeenth century and to this day
speak their broken French. You all know that we
owe the new Swedish constitution to a Walloon.
Capable people, these Walloons, and very honest!"</p>

<p>"What in the name of heaven does it all mean?" <span class="pagenum">[264]</span></p>

<p>"In the reign of King Gustavus Adolphus a whole
cargo of Scotch scum landed on our coast and took
service in the army; they eventually forced their
way into the House of Knights. At the East coast
there are many families who cherish traditions of
their immigration from Livland and other Slavonic
provinces, and so it is not surprising that we frequently
meet here pure Tartar types.</p>

<p>"I maintain that the Swedish nation is fast becoming
denationalized. Open a book on heraldry
and count the Swedish names! If they exceed 25
per cent. you may cut off my nose, gentlemen! Open
the directory at random! I counted the letter G, and
of four hundred names two hundred were foreign.</p>

<p>"What is the cause of this? There are many
causes, but the principal ones are the foreign dynasties
and the wars of conquest. If one thinks of all the
scum that has sat on the Swedish throne at one time
or another, one cannot help marvelling that the
nation is so loyal to the king. The constitutional law
that the kings of Sweden shall be foreigners is bound
to be of the greatest assistance in the work of denationalization;
this has been proved to be a fact.</p>

<p>"I am convinced that the country will gain by its
alliance with foreign nations; it cannot lose anything&mdash;because
it has nothing to lose. The country
has no nationality; Tegnér discovered that in 1811,
and short-sightedly bemoaned the fact. But his
discovery came too late, for the race had already been
ruined by the constant recruiting for the foolish wars
of conquest. Of the one million men which inhabited
the country in the days of Gustavus Adolphus, seventy
thousand enlisted and were killed in the wars. I do
not know for how many Charles X, Charles XI, and
Charles XII were responsible; but it is easy to picture
the offspring of those who remained behind, the men
whom the crown had rejected as unfit for service.</p>

<p>"I repeat my statement that Sweden has no
nationality. Can anybody tell me of anything
Swedish in Sweden except her firs, pine trees, and<span class="pagenum">[265]</span>
iron-mines? And the latter will soon disappear from
the market. What is our folk-lore but bad translations
of French, English, and German ballads? What
are the national costumes, the disappearance of which
we so keenly regret, other than fragments and tatters
of the aristocratic mediæval costumes? In the days
of Gustavus I the dalesmen demanded that all those
who wore low-cut or many-coloured dresses should be
punished. Probably the gay court-dress from Burgundy
had not yet filtered down to the daleswomen.
But since then the fashion has changed many times.</p>

<p>"Tell me of a Swedish poem, a work of art, a piece
of music, so specifically Swedish that it differs from
all other not-Swedish ones! Show me a Swedish
building! There isn't one, and if there were, it would
either be bad architecture or built in a foreign
style.</p>

<p>"I don't think I'm exaggerating when I maintain
that the Swedish nation is a stupid, conceited, slavish,
envious, and uncouth nation. And for this reason it
is approaching its end, and approaching it with giant
strides."</p>

<p>A tumult arose in the hall, but shouts of Charles XII
could be heard above the turmoil.</p>

<p>"Gentlemen, Charles XII is dead; let him sleep
until his next jubilee. To no one are we more
indebted for our denationalisation than to him, and
therefore, gentlemen, I call for three cheers for
Charles XII! Gentlemen, long live Charles XII!"</p>

<p>"I call the meeting to order!" shouted the chairman.</p>

<p>"Is it possible to imagine that a nation can be
guilty of a greater piece of folly than to go to foreign
nations in order to learn to write poetry?</p>

<p>"What unsurpassable oxen they must have been
to walk for sixteen hundred years behind the plough
and never conceive the idea of inventing a song!</p>

<p>"Then a jolly fellow of the court of Charles XII
came along and destroyed the whole work of denationalization.
The literary language, which up to<span class="pagenum">[266]</span>
now had been German, was henceforth to be Swedish:
Down with the dog Stjernhjelm!</p>

<p>"What was his name? Edward Stjernström!"</p>

<p>The chairman's hammer came down on the table
with a bang. The disturbance grew. "Stop him!
Down with the traitor! He's laughing at us!"</p>

<p>"The Swedish nation can scream and brawl, I am
aware of that! They can do nothing else! And as
you will not allow me to continue my lecture and
discuss the Government and the royal copyholds, I
will conclude by saying that the servile louts whom
I have heard to-night are ripe for the autocracy which
they are sure to get. Believe my words: You will
have an absolute monarchy before very long!"</p>

<p>A push from the back jerked the words of the
speaker out of his throat. He clung to the table:</p>

<p>"And an ungrateful race who will not listen to the
truth...."</p>

<p>"Kick him out! Tear him to pieces!"</p>

<p>Olle was dragged from the platform; but to the
last moment, while knocks and blows rained down on
him, he yelled like a madman: "Long live Charles
XII! Down with George Stjernhjelm!"</p>

<p>At last Olle and Arvid were standing in the street.</p>

<p>"Whatever were you thinking of?" asked Falk.
"You must have taken leave of your senses!"</p>

<p>"I believe I had! I had learnt my speech by heart
for the last six weeks; I knew to a word what I was
going to say; but when I stood on the platform and
saw all those eyes gazing at me, it all went to pieces;
my artificial arguments broke down like a scaffolding;
the floor underneath my feet gave way, and my
thoughts became confusion. Was it very crazy?"</p>

<p>"Yes, it was bad, and the papers will pull you to
pieces."</p>

<p>"That's a pity, I admit. I thought I was making
it all so clear. But it <i>was</i> fun to give it them for once."</p>

<p>"You only injured your cause; they'll never let
you speak again."</p>

<p>Olle sighed.<span class="pagenum">[267]</span></p>

<p>"Why in the name of fortune couldn't you leave
Charles XII alone? That was your worst mistake."</p>

<p>"Don't ask me! I don't know!"</p>

<p>"Do you still love the working man?" asked Falk.</p>

<p>"I pity him for allowing himself to be humbugged
by adventurers, and I shall never abandon his cause,
for his cause is the burning question of the near
future, and all your politics aren't worth a penny in
comparison."</p>

<p>The two friends were making their way back to old
Stockholm, and finally entered a café.</p>

<p>It was between nine and ten and the room was
almost empty. A single customer was sitting near
the counter. He was reading from a book to a girl
who sat beside him doing needlework. It was a
pretty, domestic scene, but it seemed to make a strong
impression on Falk, who started violently and changed
colour.</p>

<p>"Sellén! You here? Good evening, Beda!" he
said, with artificial cordiality which sat strangely on
him, shaking hands with the girl.</p>

<p>"Hallo! Falk, old chap!" said Sellén. "So you
are in the habit of coming here too? I might have
guessed it, you are hardly ever at the Red Room
now."</p>

<p>Arvid and Beda exchanged glances. The young
girl looked too distinguished for her position; she had
a delicate, intelligent face, which betrayed a secret
sorrow; and a slender figure. Her movements were
full of self-confidence and modesty; her eyes were set
in her face at a slightly upward angle; they seemed
to be peering skyward as if they were anticipating evil
to drop down from the clouds; with this exception
they looked as if they were ready to play all the
games which the whim of the moment might dictate.</p>

<p>"How grave you are," she said to Arvid, and her
gaze dropped to her sewing.</p>

<p>"I've been to a grave meeting," said Arvid, blushing
like a girl. "What were you reading?"</p>

<p>"I was reading the Dedication from Faust," said<span class="pagenum">[268]</span>
Sellén, stretching out his hand and playing with Beda's
needlework.</p>

<p>A cloud darkened Arvid's face. The conversation
became forced and restrained. Olle sat plunged in
meditations, the subject of which must have been
suicide.</p>

<p>Arvid asked for a paper and was given the <i>Incorruptible</i>.
He remembered that he had forgotten to
look for the review of his poems. He hastily opened
the paper and on page three he found what he sought.</p>

<p>His eyes met neither compliments nor abuse; the
article was dictated by genuine and deep interest.
The reviewer found Arvid's poetry neither better nor
worse than the average, but just as selfish and meaningless;
he said that it treated only of the poet's
private affairs, of illicit relations, real or fictitious;
that it coquetted with little sins, but did not mourn
over great ones; that it was no better than the
English fashion-paper poetry, and he suggested that
the author's portrait should have preceded the title-page;
then the poems would have been illustrated.</p>

<p>These simple truths made a great impression on
Arvid; he had only read the advertisement in the
<i>Grey Bonnet</i>, written by Struve, and the review in the
<i>Red Cap</i>, coloured by personal friendship. He rose
with a brief good-night.</p>

<p>"Are you going already?" asked Beda.</p>

<p>"Yes; are we going to meet to-morrow?"</p>

<p>"Yes, as usual. Good-night."</p>

<p>Sellén and Olle followed him.</p>

<p>"She's a rare child," said Sellén, after they had
proceeded a little way in silence.</p>

<p>"I should thank you to be a little more restrained
in your criticism."</p>

<p>"I see. You're in love with her!"</p>

<p>"Yes. I hope you don't mind."</p>

<p>"Not in the least. I shan't get into your way!"</p>

<p>"And I beg you not to believe any evil of her...."</p>

<p>"Of course I won't! She's been on the stage...."</p>

<p>"How do you know? She never told me that!" <span class="pagenum">[269]</span></p>

<p>"No, but she told me; one can never trust these
little devils too far."</p>

<p>"Oh well! there's no harm in that! I shall take
her away from her surroundings as soon as I possibly
can. Our relations are limited to meeting in the
Haga Park at eight in the morning and drinking the
water from the well."</p>

<p>"How sweet and simple! Do you never take her
out to supper?"</p>

<p>"I never thought of making such an improper
suggestion; she would refuse it with scorn. You are
laughing! Laugh if you like! I still have faith in a
woman who loves whatever class she may belong to,
and whatever her past may have been. She told me
that her life had not been above reproach, but I have
promised never to ask her about her past."</p>

<p>"Is it serious then?"</p>

<p>"Yes, it is serious."</p>

<p>"That's another thing; Good-night, Falk! Are
you coming with me, Olle?"</p>

<p>"Good night."</p>

<p>"Poor Falk!" said Sellén to Olle. "Now it's his
turn to go through the mill. But there's no help for
it; it's like changing one's teeth; a man is not grown
up until he has had his experience."</p>

<p>"What about the girl?" asked Olle, merely in
order to show a polite interest, for his thoughts were
elsewhere.</p>

<p>"She's all right in her way, but Falk takes the
matter seriously; she does too, apparently, as long
as she sees any prospect of winning him; but unless
Falk's quick about it, she will grow tired of waiting,
and who knows whether she won't amuse herself
meanwhile with somebody else? No, you don't
understand these things; a man shouldn't hesitate in
a love-affair, but grab with both hands; otherwise
somebody else will step in and spoil the game. Have
you ever been in love, Olle?"</p>

<p>"I had an affair with one of our servants at home;
there were consequences, and my father turned me<span class="pagenum">[270]</span>
out of the house. Since then I haven't looked at a
woman."</p>

<p>"That was nothing very complicated. But to be
betrayed, as it is called, that's what hurts, I can tell
you! One must have nerves like the strings of a
violin to play that game. We shall see what sort
of a fight Falk will make; with some men it goes very
deep, and that's a pity.</p>

<p>"The door is open, come in Olle! I hope the beds
are properly made, so that you will lie softly; but you
must excuse my old bed-maker, she cannot shake up
the feather-beds; her fingers are weak, don't you see,
and the pillow, I'm afraid, may be hard and lumpy."</p>

<p>They had climbed the stairs and were entering the
studio.</p>

<p>"It smells damp, as if the servant had aired the
room or scrubbed it."</p>

<p>"You are laughing at yourself! There can be no
more scrubbing, you have no longer a floor."</p>

<p>"Haven't I? Ah! That makes a difference!
But what has become of it? Has it been used for
fuel? There's nothing for it then, but to lie down on
our mother earth, or rubbish, or whatever it may be."</p>

<p>They lay down in their clothes on the floor-packing,
having made a kind of bed for themselves of pieces of
canvas and old newspapers, and pushed cases filled
with sketches underneath their heads. Olle struck a
match, produced a tallow candle from his trousers
pocket and put it on the floor beside him. A faint
gleam flickered through the huge, bare studio,
passionately resisting the volumes of darkness which
tried to pour in through the colossal windows.</p>

<p>"It's cold to-night," said Olle, opening a greasy
book.</p>

<p>"Cold! Oh no! There are only twenty degrees
of frost outside, and thirty in here because we are so
high up. What's the time, I wonder?"</p>

<p>"I believe St. John's just struck one."</p>

<p>"St. John's? They have no clock! They are so
poor that they had to pawn it." <span class="pagenum">[271]</span></p>

<p>There was a long pause which was finally broken by
Sellén.</p>

<p>"What are you reading, Olle?"</p>

<p>"Never mind!"</p>

<p>"Never mind? Hadn't you better be more civil,
seeing that you are my guest?"</p>

<p>"An old cookery book which I borrowed from
Ygberg."</p>

<p>"The deuce you did! Do let's read it; I've only
had a cup of coffee and three glasses of water to-day."</p>

<p>"What would you like?" asked Olle, turning over
the leaves. "Would you like some fish? Do you
know what a mayonnaise is?"</p>

<p>"Mayonnaise? No! Read it! It sounds good!"</p>

<p>"Well, listen! No. 139. Mayonnaise: Take some
butter, flour, and a pinch of English mustard, and
make it into a smooth paste. Beat it up with good
stock, and when boiling add the yolks of a few eggs;
beat well and let it stand to cool."</p>

<p>"No, thank you; that's not filling enough...."</p>

<p>"Oh, but that's not all. Then take a few spoonfuls
of fine salad oil, vinegar, a spoonful of cream, some
white pepper&mdash;oh, yes, I see now, it's no good. Do
you want something more substantial?"</p>

<p>"Try and find toad-in-the-hole. It's my favourite
dish."</p>

<p>"I can't go on reading."</p>

<p>"Do!"</p>

<p>"No, leave me alone!"</p>

<p>They were silent. The candle went out and it was
quite dark.</p>

<p>"Good-night, Olle; wrap yourself well up, or
you'll be cold."</p>

<p>"What with?"</p>

<p>"I don't know. Aren't we having a jolly time?"</p>

<p>"I wonder why one doesn't kill oneself when one
is so cold."</p>

<p>"Because it would be wrong. I find it quite interesting
to live, if only to see what will come of it
all in the end." <span class="pagenum">[272]</span></p>

<p>"Are your parents alive, Sellén?"</p>

<p>"No; I'm illegitimate. Yours?"</p>

<p>"Yes; but it comes to the same thing."</p>

<p>"You should be more grateful to Providence, Olle;
one should always be grateful to Providence&mdash;I don't
quite know why. But I suppose one should."</p>

<p>Again there was silence. The next time it was
Olle who broke it.</p>

<p>"Are you asleep?"</p>

<p>"No; I'm thinking of the statue of Gustavus
Adolphus; would you believe me when I...."</p>

<p>"Aren't you cold?"</p>

<p>"Cold? It's quite warm here."</p>

<p>"My right foot is frozen."</p>

<p>"Pull the paint box over you, and tuck the brushes
round your sides, then you'll be warmer."</p>

<p>"Do you think anybody in the world is as badly off
as we are?"</p>

<p>"Badly off? Do you call us badly off when we
have a roof over our heads? Some of the professors
at the Academy, men who wear three-cornered hats
and swords now, were much worse off than we are.
Professor Lundström slept during nearly the whole of
April in the theatre in the Hop garden. There was
style in that! He had the whole of the left stage-box,
and he maintains that after one o'clock there wasn't a
single stall vacant; there was always a good house in
the winter and a bad one in the summer. Good night,
I'm going to sleep now."</p>

<p>Sellén snored. But Olle rose and paced the room,
up and down, until the dawn broke in the east; then
day took pity on him and gave him the peace which
night had denied him.<span class="pagenum">[273]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXV" id="CHAPTER_XXV"></a>CHAPTER XXV</h2>

<h3>CHECKMATE</h3>

<p>The winter passed; slowly for the sufferers, more
quickly for those who were less unhappy. Spring
came with its disappointed hopes of sun and verdure,
and in its turn made room for the summer which was
but a short introduction to the autumn.</p>

<p>On a May morning Arvid Falk, now a member of
the permanent staff of the <i>Workman's Flag</i>, was
strolling along the quay, watching the vessels loading
and discharging their cargoes. He looked less well-groomed
than in days gone by; his black hair was
longer than fashion decreed, and he wore a beard à la
Henri IV, which gave his thin face an almost savage
expression. An ominous fire burned in his eyes,
a fire denoting the fanatic or the drunkard.</p>

<p>He seemed to be endeavouring to make a choice
among the vessels, but was unable to come to a
decision. After hesitating for a considerable time,
he accosted one of the sailors, who was wheeling a
barrow full of goods on to a brig. He courteously
raised his hat.</p>

<p>"Can you tell me the destination of this ship?"
he asked timidly, imagining that he was speaking
in a bold voice.</p>

<p>"Ship? I see no ship?"</p>

<p>The bystanders laughed.</p>

<p>"But if you want to know where this brig's bound
for, go and read that bill over there!"</p>

<p>Falk was disconcerted, but he forced himself to
say, angrily:</p>

<p>"Can't you give a civil reply to a civil question?" <span class="pagenum">[274]</span></p>

<p>"Go to hell, and don't stand there swearing at a
fellow!&mdash;'tention!"</p>

<p>The conversation broke off, and Falk made up his
mind. He retraced his footsteps, passed through a
narrow street, crossed a market-place, and turned
the first corner. Before the door of a dirty-looking
house he stopped. Again he hesitated; he could
never overcome his besetting sin of indecision.</p>

<p>A small, ragged boy with a squint came running
along, his hands full of proofs in long strips; as he
was going to pass Falk, the latter stopped him.</p>

<p>"Is the editor upstairs?" he asked.</p>

<p>"Yes, he's been here since seven," replied the
boy, breathlessly.</p>

<p>"Has he asked for me?"</p>

<p>"Yes, more than once."</p>

<p>"Is he in a bad temper?"</p>

<p>"He always is."</p>

<p>The boy shot upstairs like an arrow. Falk, following
on his heels, entered the editorial office. It
was a hole with two windows looking on a dark
street; before each of the windows stood a plain
deal table, covered with paper, pens, newspapers,
scissors and a gum bottle.</p>

<p>One of the tables was occupied by his old friend
Ygberg, dressed in a ragged black coat, engaged in
reading proofs. At the other table, which was
Falk's, sat a man in shirt sleeves, his head covered
by a black silk cap of the kind affected by the communards.
His face was covered by a red beard, and
his thick-set figure with its clumsy outlines betrayed
the man of the people.</p>

<p>As Falk entered, the communard's legs kicked the
table violently: he turned up his shirt-sleeves, displaying
blue tattoo marks representing an anchor
and an Anglo-Saxon R, seized a pair of scissors,
savagely stabbed the front page of a morning paper,
cut out a paragraph, and said, rudely, with his back
to Falk:</p>

<p>"Where have you been?" <span class="pagenum">[275]</span></p>

<p>"I've been ill," replied Falk, defiantly, as he
thought, but humbly as Ygberg told him afterwards.</p>

<p>"It's a lie! You've been drinking! I saw you
at a café last night...."</p>

<p>"Surely I can go where I please."</p>

<p>"You can do what you like; but you've got to
be here at the stroke of the clock, according to our
agreement. It's a quarter past eight. I am well
aware that gentlemen who have been to college,
where they imagine they learn a lot, have no idea
of method and manners. Don't you call it ill-bred
to be late at your work? Aren't you behaving like
a boor when you compel your employer to do your
work? What? It's the world turned upside down!
The employé treats the master&mdash;the employer, if you
like&mdash;as if he were a dog, and capital is oppressed."</p>

<p>"When did you come to these conclusions?"</p>

<p>"When? Just now, sir! just now! And I trust
these conclusions are worth considering, in spite of
that. But I discovered something else; you are an
ignoramus; you can't spell! Look at this! What's
written here? Read it! 'We hope that all those
who will have to go through their drill next year....'
Is it possible? '<i>Who ... next year....</i>'"</p>

<p>"Well, that's quite right," said Falk.</p>

<p>"Right? How dare you say it's right? It's
customary to say <i>who in the next year</i>, and consequently
it should also be written in this form."</p>

<p>"That's right, too; definitions of time govern
either the accusative or...."</p>

<p>"None of your learned palaver! Don't talk nonsense
to me! Besides this you spell ex-ercise with
an x only, although it should be spelt <i>ex-sercise</i>.
Don't make excuses&mdash;is it ex-ercise or ex-sercise?"</p>

<p>"Of course people say...."</p>

<p>"People say&mdash;therefore ex-sercise is right; the
customary pronunciation must be correct. Perhaps,
all things considered, I'm a fool? Perhaps I can't
spell correctly? But enough, now! Get to work and
another time pay a little more attention to the clock." <span class="pagenum">[276]</span></p>

<p>He jumped up from his chair with a yell, and boxed
the ears of the printer's boy.</p>

<p>"Are you sleeping in bright daylight, you young
scamp? I'll teach you to keep awake. You are
not yet too old for a thrashing."</p>

<p>He seized the victim by the braces, threw him on a
pile of unsold papers, and beat him with his belt.</p>

<p>"I wasn't asleep! I wasn't asleep! I was only
closing my eyes a little," howled the boy.</p>

<p>"What, you dare to deny it? You've learned to
lie, but I will teach you to speak the truth! Were
you asleep or were you not asleep? Tell the truth
or you'll be sorry for it."</p>

<p>"I wasn't asleep," whimpered the boy, too young
and inexperienced to get over his difficulty by telling
a lie.</p>

<p>"I see, you mean to stand by your lie, you hardened
little devil! You insolent liar!"</p>

<p>He was going to continue the thrashing when Falk
rose, approached the editor, and said firmly:</p>

<p>"Don't touch him! I saw that he was not
asleep!"</p>

<p>"By jove! Listen to him! Who the dickens are
you? Don't touch him! Who said those words?
I must have heard a gnat buzzing. Or perhaps my
ears deceived me. I hope so! I do hope so! Mr.
Ygberg! You are a decent fellow. You haven't
been to college. Did you happen to see whether this
boy, whom I'm holding by the braces like a fish, was
asleep or not?"</p>

<p>"If he wasn't asleep," replied Ygberg, phlegmatically
and obligingly, "he was just on the point
of dropping off."</p>

<p>"Well answered! Would you mind holding him,
Mr. Ygberg, while I give him a lesson with my cane
in telling the truth?"</p>

<p>"You've no right to beat him," said Falk. "If
you dare to touch him, I shall open the window and
call for the police."</p>

<p>"I am master in my own house and I always<span class="pagenum">[277]</span>
thrash my apprentices. He is an apprentice and
will be employed in the editorial office later on.
That's what's going to be done, although there are
people who imagine that a paper can only be properly
edited by a man who has been to college. Speak up,
Gustav, are you learning newspaper work? Answer,
but tell the truth, or...."</p>

<p>Before the boy had time to reply, the door was
opened and a head looked in&mdash;a very striking head,
and certainly not one that might have been expected
in such a place; but it was a well-known head; it
had been painted five times.</p>

<p>At the sight of it the editor strapped his belt
round him, hastily put on his coat, bowed and
smiled.</p>

<p>The visitor asked whether the editor was disengaged?
He received a satisfactory reply, and the
last remnant of the working man disappeared when
a quick movement swept the communard's cap off
the editor's head.</p>

<p>Both men went into an inner office and the door
closed behind them.</p>

<p>"I wonder what the Count's after?" said Ygberg,
with the air of a schoolboy, when the master had left
the class-room.</p>

<p>"I don't wonder in the least," said Falk; "I think
I know the kind of rascal he is, and the kind of rascal
the editor is. But I am surprised to find that you
have changed from a mere blockhead into an infamous
wretch, and that you lend yourself to these disgraceful
acts."</p>

<p>"Don't lose your temper, my dear fellow! You
were not at the House last night?"</p>

<p>"No! In my opinion Parliament is a farce,
except in so far as private interests are concerned.
What about the 'Triton'?"</p>

<p>"The question was put to the vote, and it was
resolved that the Government, in view of the greatness,
the patriotism, which characterized the enterprise,
should take over the debentures while the<span class="pagenum">[278]</span>
society went into liquidation, that is to say, settled
the current affairs."</p>

<p>"Which means that Government will prop up the
house while the foundation crumbles away, so as to
give the directors time to get out of harm's way."</p>

<p>"You would rather that all those small...."</p>

<p>"I know what you are going to say, all those
small capitalists. Yes, I would rather see them
working with their small capital than idling away
their time and lending it out at interest; but, above
all things, I should like to see those sharpers in prison;
it would help to put a stop to these swindles. But
they call it political economy! It's vile! There's
something else I want to say: You covet my post.
You shall have it! I hate the idea of your sitting
in your corner with a heart filled with bitterness,
because you have to sweep up after me in reading
proofs. There are already too many of my unprinted
articles lying on the desk of this contemptible apostle
of liberty to tempt me to go on telling cock-and-bull
stories. The <i>Red Cap</i> was too Conservative to
please me, but the <i>People's Flag</i> is too dirty."</p>

<p>"I am glad to see you relinquishing your chimeras
and listening to common sense. Go to the <i>Grey
Bonnet</i>, you'll have a chance there."</p>

<p>"I have lost the illusion that the cause of the
oppressed lies in good hands, and I think it would be
a splendid mission to enlighten the people on the
value of public opinion&mdash;especially printed public
opinion&mdash;and its origin; but I shall never abandon
the cause."</p>

<p>The door to the inner room opened again, and the
editor came out. He stood still in the middle of the
office and said, in an unnaturally conciliatory voice,
almost politely:</p>

<p>"I want you to look after the office for a day,
Mr. Falk. I have to go away on important
business. Mr. Ygberg will assist you so far as the
daily business is concerned. His Lordship will be
using my room for a few minutes. I hope, gentlemen,<span class="pagenum">[279]</span>
you will see that he has everything he wants."</p>

<p>"Oh, please don't trouble," came the Count's
voice from inside the room, where he was sitting
bent over a manuscript.</p>

<p>The editor went and, strange to say, two minutes
later the Count went also; he had waited just long
enough to avoid being seen in the company of the
editor of the <i>Workman's Flag</i>.</p>

<p>"Are you sure that he's gone?" asked Ygberg.</p>

<p>"I hope so," said Falk.</p>

<p>"Then I'll go and have a look at the market.
By-the-by, have you seen Beda since?"</p>

<p>"Since when?"</p>

<p>"Since she left the café and went to live in a room
by herself."</p>

<p>"How do you know she did?"</p>

<p>"Do control your temper, Falk. You'll never get
on in the world unless you do."</p>

<p>"Yes, you're right. I must take matters more
calmly, or else I'll go out of my mind! But that girl,
whom I loved so dearly! How shamefully she has
treated me! To give to that clumsy boor all she
denied to me! And then to have the face to tell me
that it proved the purity of her love for me!"</p>

<p>"Most excellent dialectics! And she is quite
right too, for her first proposition is correct. She
does love you, doesn't she?"</p>

<p>"She's running after me, anyhow."</p>

<p>"And you?"</p>

<p>"I hate her with all my soul, but I am afraid to
meet her."</p>

<p>"Which proves that you are still in love with her."</p>

<p>"Let's change the subject!"</p>

<p>"You really must control yourself, Falk! Take
an example from me! But now I'll go and sun
myself; one should enjoy life as much as possible
in this dreary world. Gustav, you can go and play
buttons for an hour, if you like."</p>

<p>Falk was left alone. The sun threw his rays over<span class="pagenum">[280]</span>
the steep roof opposite and warmed the room; he
opened the window and put out his head for a breath
of fresh air, but he only breathed the pungent odours
of the gutter. His glance swept the street on the
right and far away in the distance he saw a part
of a steamer, a few waves of the Lake of Mälar
glittering in the sunlight, and a hollow in the rocks
on the other side, which were just beginning to show
a little green here and there. He thought of the
people whom that steamer would take into the
country, who would bathe in those waves and feast
their eyes on the young green. But at this moment
the whitesmith below him began to hammer a sheet
of iron, so that house and window panes trembled;
two or three labourers went by with a rattling, evil-smelling
cart, and an odour of brandy, beer, sawdust,
and pine-branches poured out of the inn opposite.
He shut the window and sat down at his table.</p>

<p>Before him lay a heap of about a hundred provincial
papers, from which it was his task to make cuttings.
He took off his cuffs and began to look through them.
They smelt of oil and soot and blackened his hands&mdash;that
was their principal feature. Nothing he considered
worthy of reprinting was of any use, for he had
to consider the programme of his paper. A report
to the effect that the workmen of a certain factory
had given the foreman a silver snuff-box had to be
cut out; but the notice of a manufacturer having
given five hundred crowns to his working-men's
funds had to be ignored. A paragraph reporting that
the Duke of Halland had handselled a pile-driver,
and Director Holzheim celebrated the event in verses,
had to be cut out and reproduced in full "because
the people liked to read this kind of thing"; if he
could add a little biting sarcasm, all the better, for
then "they were sure to hear about it."</p>

<p>Roughly speaking, the rule was to cut out everything
said in favour of journalists and working men
and everything depreciating clergymen, officers,
wholesale merchants (not retail), the professions, and<span class="pagenum">[281]</span>
famous writers. Moreover, at least once a week, it
was his business to attack the management of the
Royal Theatre, and severely criticize the frivolous
musical comedies produced in the Little Theatre, in
the name of morality and public decency&mdash;he had
noticed that the working men did not patronize
these theatres. Once a month the town councillors
had to be accused of extravagance. As often as
opportunity arose the form of government, not
Government itself, had to be assailed. The editor
severely censored all attacks on certain members of
Parliament and ministers. Which? That was a
mystery unknown to even the editor; it depended
on a combination of circumstances which only the
secret proprietor of the paper could deal with.</p>

<p>Falk worked with his scissors until one of his
hands was black. He had frequent recourse to the
gum-bottle, but the gum smelt sour and the heat in
the room was stifling. The poor aloe, capable of
enduring thirst like a camel, and patiently receiving
countless stabs from an irritated steel-nib, increased
the terrible resemblance to a desert. It had been
stabbed until it was covered with black wounds;
its leaves shot, like a bundle of donkeys' ears out of
the parched mould. Falk probably had a vague
consciousness of something of this sort, as he sat,
plunged in thought, for before he could realize what
he was doing, he had docked off all the ear lobes.
When he perceived what he had done, he painted
the wounds with gum and watched it drying in the
sun.</p>

<p>He vaguely wondered for a few moments how he
was to get dinner, for he had strayed on to that
path which leads to destruction, so-called <i>poor circumstances</i>.
Finally he lit a pipe and watched the
soothing smoke rising and bathing, for a few seconds
in the sunshine. It made him feel more tolerant of
poor Sweden, as she expressed herself in these daily,
weekly, and monthly reports, called the Press.</p>

<p>He put the scissors aside and threw the papers into a<span class="pagenum">[282]</span>
corner; he shared the contents of the earthen water-bottle
with the aloe; the miserable object looked like
a creature whose wings had been clipped; a spirit
standing in a bog on its head, digging for something;
for pearls, for instance, or at any rate, for empty
shells.</p>

<p>Then despair, like a tanner, seized him again with a
long hook, and pushed him down into the vat, where
he was to be prepared for the knife, which should
scrape his skin off and make him like everybody else.
And he felt no remorse, no regret at a wasted life, but
only despair at having to die in his youth, die the
spiritual death, before he had had an opportunity of
being of use in the world; despair that he was being
cast into the fire as a useless reed.</p>

<p>The clock on the German church struck eleven, and
the chimes began to play "Oh blessed land" and
"My life a wave"; as if seized by the same idea, an
Italian barrel-organ, with a flute accompaniment,
began to play "The Blue Danube." So much music
put new life into the tinsmith below, who began
hammering his iron-sheet with redoubled energy.</p>

<p>The din and uproar prevented Falk from becoming
aware of the opening of the door and the entrance of
two men. One of them had a tall, lean figure, an
aquiline nose and long hair; the other one was short,
blond, and thick set; his perspiring face much
resembled the quadruped which the Hebrews consider
more unclean than any other. Their outward appearance
betrayed an occupation requiring neither much
mental nor great physical strength; it had a quality
of vagueness, pointing to irregularity of work and
habits.</p>

<p>"Hsh!" whispered the tall man, "are you alone?"</p>

<p>Falk was partly pleased, partly annoyed at the sight
of his visitors.</p>

<p>"Quite alone; the Red One's left town."</p>

<p>"Has he? Come along then and have some
dinner."</p>

<p>Falk had no objection; he locked the office and<span class="pagenum">[283]</span>
went with his visitors to the nearest public-house,
where the three of them sat down in the darkest
corner.</p>

<p>"Here, have some brandy," said the thick-set man,
whose glazed eyes sparkled at the sight of the brandy
bottle.</p>

<p>But Falk who had only joined his friends because
he was yearning for sympathy and comfort, paid no
attention to the proffered delights.</p>

<p>"I haven't been as miserable as this for a long
time," he said.</p>

<p>"Have some bread and butter and a herring," said
the tall man. "We'll have some caraway cheese.
Here! Waiter!"</p>

<p>"Can't you advise me?" Falk began again. "I
can't stand the Red One any longer, and I must...."</p>

<p>"Here! Waiter! Bring some black bread! Drink,
Falk, and don't talk nonsense."</p>

<p>Falk was thrown out of the saddle; he made no
second attempt to find sympathy with his mental
difficulties, but tried another, not unusual way.</p>

<p>"Your advice is the brandy bottle?" he said.
"Very well, with all my soul, then!"</p>

<p>The alcohol flowed through his veins like poison, for
he was not accustomed to take strong drink in the
morning; the smell of cooking, the buzzing of the
flies, the odour of the faded flowers, which stood by
the side of the dirty table-centre, induced in him
a strange feeling of well-being. And his low companions
with their neglected linen, their greasy coats,
and their unwashed gaol-bird faces harmonized so well
with his own degraded position, that he felt a wild joy
surging in his heart.</p>

<p>"We were in the Deer Park last night and, by Jove!
we did drink," said the stout man, once more enjoying
the past delights in memory.</p>

<p>Falk had no answer to this, and moreover, his
thoughts were running in a different groove.</p>

<p>"Isn't it jolly to have a morning off?" said the tall
man, who seemed to be playing the part of tempter.<span class="pagenum">[284]</span></p>

<p>"It is, indeed!" replied Falk, trying to measure his
freedom, as it were, with a glance through the window;
but all he saw was a fire-escape and a dust-bin in a
yard which never received more than a faint reflexion
of the summer sky.</p>

<p>"Half a pint! That's it! Ah! Well and what
do you say to the 'Triton'? Hahaha!"</p>

<p>"Don't laugh," said Falk; "many a poor devil will
suffer through it."</p>

<p>"Who are the poor devils? Poor capitalists? Are
you sorry for those who don't work, but live on the
proceeds of their money? No, my boy, you are still
full of prejudices! There was a funny tale in the <i>Hornet</i>
about a wholesale merchant, who bequeathed to the
crèche Bethlehem twenty thousand crowns, and was
given the order of Vasa for his munificence; now it
has transpired that the bequest was in 'Triton' shares
with joint liability, and so the crèche is of course
bankrupt. Isn't that lovely? The assets were
twenty-five cradles and an oil painting by an unknown
master. It's too funny! The portrait was valued at
five crowns! Hahahaha!"</p>

<p>The subject of conversation irritated Falk, for he
knew more of the matter than the two others.</p>

<p>"Did you see that the <i>Red Cap</i> unmasked that
humbug Schönström who published that volume of
miserable verses at Christmas?" said the stout man.
"It really was a rare pleasure to learn the truth about
the rascal. I have more than once given him a sound
slating in the <i>Copper-Snake</i>."</p>

<p>"But you were rather unjust; his verses were not
as bad as you said," remarked the tall man.</p>

<p>"Not as bad? They were worse than mine which
the <i>Grey Bonnet</i> tore to shreds. Don't you remember?"</p>

<p>"By-the-by, Falk, have you been to the theatre in
the Deer Park?" asked the tall man.</p>

<p>"No!"</p>

<p>"What a pity! That Lundholm gang of thieves is
playing there. Impudent fellow, the director! He
sent no seats to the <i>Copper-Snake</i>, and when we<span class="pagenum">[285]</span>
arrived at the theatre last night, he turned us out.
But he'll pay for it! You give it to the dog! Here's
paper and pencil. Heading: 'Theatre and Music.
Deer Park Theatre.' Now, you go on!"</p>

<p>"But I haven't seen the company."</p>

<p>"What does that matter? Have you never written
about anything you hadn't seen?"</p>

<p>"No! I've unmasked humbugs, but I have never
attacked unoffending people, and I know nothing
about this company."</p>

<p>"They are a miserable lot. Just scum," affirmed
the stout man. "Sharpen your pen and bruise his
heel; you are splendid at it."</p>

<p>"Why don't you bruise him yourselves?"</p>

<p>"Because the printers know our handwriting and
some of them walk on in the crowds. Moreover Lundholm
is a violent fellow; he will be sure to invade the
editorial office; then it will be a good thing to be able
to tell him that the criticism is a communication from
the public. And while you write up the stage, I will
do the concerts. There was a sacred concert last
week. Wasn't the man's name Daubry? With
a 'y'?"</p>

<p>"No, with an 'i,'" corrected the fat man. "Don't
forget that he's a tenor and sang the 'Stabat Mater.'"</p>

<p>"How do you spell it?"</p>

<p>"I'll tell you in a minute."</p>

<p>The stout editor of the <i>Copper-Snake</i> took a packet
of greasy newspapers from the gas-meter.</p>

<p>"Here's the whole programme, and, I believe, a
criticism as well."</p>

<p>Falk could not help laughing.</p>

<p>"How could a criticism appear simultaneously
with the advertisement?"</p>

<p>"Why shouldn't it? But we shan't want it; I
will criticize that French mob myself. You'd better
do the literature, Fatty!"</p>

<p>"Do the publishers send books to the <i>Copper-Snake</i>?"
asked Falk.</p>

<p>"Are you mad?" <span class="pagenum">[286]</span></p>

<p>"Do you buy them yourselves for the sake of
reviewing them?"</p>

<p>"Buy them? Greenhorn! Have another glass
and cheer up, and I'll treat you to a chop."</p>

<p>"Do you read the books which you review?"</p>

<p>"Who do you think has time for reading books?
Isn't it enough to write about them? It's quite
sufficient to read the papers. Moreover, it's our
principle to slate everything."</p>

<p>"An absurd principle!"</p>

<p>"Not at all! It brings all the author's enemies
and enviers on one's side&mdash;and so one's in the majority.
Those who are neutral would rather see an author
slated than praised. To the nobody there is something
edifying and comforting in the knowledge that
the road to fame is beset with thorns. Don't you
think so?"</p>

<p>"You may be right. But the idea of playing with
human destinies in this way is terrible."</p>

<p>"Oh! It's good for young and old; I know that,
for I was persistently slated in my young days."</p>

<p>"But you mislead public opinion."</p>

<p>"The public does not want to have an opinion, it
wants to satisfy its passions. If I praise your enemy
you writhe like a worm and tell me that I have no
judgment; if I praise your friend, you tell me that
I have. Take that last piece of the Dramatic Theatre,
Fatty, which has just been published in book form."</p>

<p>"Are you sure that it has been published?"</p>

<p>"I am certain of it. It's quite safe to say that there
isn't enough action in it; that's a phrase the public
knows well; laugh a little at the 'beautiful language';
that's good, old, disparaging praise; then attack the
management for having accepted such a play and point
out that the moral teaching is doubtful&mdash;a very safe
thing to say about most things. But as you haven't
seen the performance, say that want of room compels
us to postpone our criticism of the acting. Do that,
and you can't make a mistake."</p>

<p>"Who is the unfortunate author?" asked Falk.<span class="pagenum">[287]</span></p>

<p>"Nobody knows."</p>

<p>"Think of his parents, his friends, who will read
your possibly quite unjust remarks."</p>

<p>"What's that got to do with the <i>Copper-Snake</i>?
They were hoping to see a friend slated; they know
what to expect from the <i>Copper-Snake</i>."</p>

<p>"Have you no conscience?"</p>

<p>"Has the public which supports us, a conscience?
Do you think we could survive if it did not support
us? Would you like to hear a paragraph which I
wrote on the present state of literature? I can assure
you it will give you plenty to think about. I have
a copy with me. But let us have some stout first.
Waiter! Here! Now I'm going to give you a
treat; you can profit by it if you like."</p>

<p>"'We have not heard so much whining in the
Swedish verse-factory for many years; this constant
puling is enough to drive a man into a lunatic asylum.
Robust rascals caterwaul like cats in March; they
imagine that anæmia and adenoids will arouse public
interest now that consumption is played out. And
withal they have backs broad as brewers' horses and
faces red as tapsters. This one whimpers about the
infidelity of women, although all he has to go on is
the bought loyalty of a wanton; that one tells us that
he has no gold, but that his "harp is all he possesses
in the world"&mdash;the liar! He has five thousand
crowns dividend per annum and the right to an
endowed chair in the Swedish Academy. A third
is a faithless, cynical scoffer, who cannot open his
lips without breathing forth his impure spirit and
babbling blasphemies. Their verses are not a whit
better than those which thirty years ago clergymen's
daughters sang to the guitar. They should write for
confectioners at a penny a line, and not waste the time
of publishers, printers, and reviewers with their
rhymes. What do they write about? About nothing
at all, that is to say about themselves. It is bad form
to talk about oneself, but it is quite the right thing
to write about oneself. What are they bemoaning?<span class="pagenum">[288]</span>
Their incapacity to achieve a success? Success?
That is the word! Have they produced one single
thought, capable of benefiting their fellow-creatures;
the age in which they live? If they had but once
championed the cause of the helpless, their sins might
be forgiven them; but they have not. Therefore
they are as sounding brass&mdash;nay, they are as a clanking
piece of tin and the cracked bell of a fool's cap&mdash;for
they have no other love than the love of the next edition
of their books, the love of the Academy and the love
of themselves.'"</p>

<p>"That's sarcasm, isn't it? What?"</p>

<p>"It's unjust," said Falk.</p>

<p>"I find it very impressive," said the stout man.
"You can't deny that it is well written. Can you?
He wields a pen which pierces shoe-leather."</p>

<p>"Now, lads, stop talking and write; afterwards you
shall have coffee and liqueurs."</p>

<p>And they wrote of human merit and human unworthiness
and broke hearts as if they were breaking
egg-shells.</p>

<p>Falk felt an indescribable longing for fresh air; he
opened the window which looked on the yard; it was
dark and narrow like a tomb; all he could see was a
small square of the sky if he bent his head far back.
He fancied that he was sitting in his grave, breathing
brandy fumes and kitchen smells, eating the funeral
repast at the burial of his youth, his principles and
his honour. He smelt the elder-blossoms which stood
on the table, but they reeked of decay; once more he
looked out of the window eager to find an object which
would not inspire him with loathing; but there was
nothing but a newly tarred dust-bin&mdash;standing
like a coffin&mdash;with its contents of cast-off finery and
broken litter. His thoughts climbed up the fire-escape
which seemed to lead from dirt, stench, and
shame right up into the blue sky; but no angels
were ascending and descending, and no love was
watching from above&mdash;there was nothing but the
empty, blue void.<span class="pagenum">[289]</span></p>

<p>Falk took his pen and began to shade the letters of
the headline "Theatre," when a strong hand clutched
his arm and a firm voice said:</p>

<p>"Come along, I want to speak to you!"</p>

<p>He looked up, taken back and ashamed. Borg
stood beside him, apparently determined not to let
him go.</p>

<p>"May I introduce...." began Falk.</p>

<p>"No, you may not," interrupted Borg, "I don't
want to know any drunken scribblers, come along."</p>

<p>He drew Falk to the door.</p>

<p>"Where's your hat? Oh, here it is! Come
along!"</p>

<p>They were in the street. Borg took his arm, led
him to the nearest square, marched him into a shop
and bought him a pair of canvas shoes. This done,
he drew him across the lock to the harbour. A cutter
lay there, fast to her moorings, but ready to go to sea;
in the cutter sat young Levi reading a Latin grammar
and munching a piece of bread and butter.</p>

<p>"This," said Borg, "is the cutter <i>Urijah</i>; it's an
ugly name, but she is a good boat and she is insured
in the 'Triton.' There sits her owner, the Hebrew lad
Isaac, reading a Latin grammar&mdash;the idiot wants to
go to college&mdash;and from this moment you are engaged
as his tutor for the summer&mdash;and now we'll be off for
our summer residence at Nämdö. All hands on board!
No demur! Ready? Put off!" <span class="pagenum">[290]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXVI" id="CHAPTER_XXVI"></a>CHAPTER XXVI</h2>

<h3>CORRESPONDENCE</h3>


<div style="text-align: center">
<span class="smcap">Candidate Borg</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Journalist Struve</span><br /></div>
<div style="text-align: right">
<span class="smcap">Nämdö</span>, <i>June 18&mdash;</i><br />
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Old scandal-monger!</span>&mdash;As I am convinced that
neither you nor Levin have paid off your instalments
of the loan made by the Shoemakers' Bank, I am
sending you herewith a promissory note, so that you
may raise a new loan from the Architects' Bank. If
there is anything over after the instalments have been
paid up, we will divide it equally amongst us. Please
send me my share by steamer to Dalarö, where I will
call for it.</p>

<p>I have now had Falk under treatment for a month,
and I believe he is on the road to recovery.</p>

<p>You will remember that after Olle's famous lecture
he left us abruptly and, instead of making use of his
brother and his brother's connexions, went on the
staff of the <i>Workman's Flag</i>, where he was ill-treated
for fifty crowns a month. But the wind of freedom
which blew there must have had a demoralizing effect
on him, for he became morose and neglected his
appearance. With the help of the girl Beda I kept my
eye on him, and when I considered him ripe for a
rupture with the communards, I went and fetched him
away.</p>

<p>I found him in a low public-house called "The
Star," in the company of two scandal writers with
whom he was drinking brandy&mdash;I believe they were
writing at the same time. He was in a melancholy
condition, as you would say.</p>

<p>As you know, I regard mankind with calm in<span class="pagenum">[291]</span>difference;
men are to me geological preparations,
minerals; some crystallize under one condition, others
under another; it all depends on certain laws or
circumstances which should leave us completely unmoved.
I don't weep over the lime-spar, because it
is not as hard as a rock-crystal.</p>

<p>Therefore I cannot regard Falk's condition as
melancholy; it was the outcome of his temperament
(heart you would say) plus the circumstances which
his temperament had created.</p>

<p>But he was certainly "down" when I found him.
I took him on board our cutter and he remained
passive. But just as we had pushed off, he turned
round and saw Beda standing on the shore, beckoning
to him; I can't think how she got there. On seeing
her, our man went clear out of his mind. Put me
ashore! he screamed, threatening to jump overboard.
I seized him by the arms, pushed him into the cabin
and locked the door.</p>

<p>As we passed Vaxholm, I posted two letters; one
to the editor of the <i>Workman's Flag</i>, begging him to
excuse Falk's absence, and the other to his landlady,
asking her to send him his clothes.</p>

<p>In the meantime he had calmed down, and when he
beheld the sea and the skerries, he became sentimental
and talked a great deal of nonsense: he had lost all
hope of ever seeing God's (?) green earth again, he
said, and so on.</p>

<p>But presently he began to suffer from something
like qualms of conscience. He maintained that he
had no right to be happy and take a holiday when
there were so many unhappy people in the world; he
imagined that he was neglecting his duty towards the
scoundrel who edits the <i>Workman's Flag</i>, and begged
us to row him back. When I talked to him of the
terrible time he had just gone through, he replied that
it was the duty of all men to work and suffer for one
another. This view had almost become a religion
with him, but I have cured him of it with soda water
and salt baths. He was completely broken, and I had<span class="pagenum">[292]</span>
great difficulty in patching him up, for it was hard to
say where the physical trouble ended and the psychical
began.</p>

<p>I must say that in a certain respect he excites my
astonishment&mdash;I won't say admiration, for I never
admire anybody. He seems to suffer from an extraordinary
mania which makes him act in direct contradiction
to his own interest. He might have been
in a splendid position, if he had not thrown up his
career in the Civil Service, particularly as his brother
would, in that case have helped him with a sum of
money. Instead of that he cast his reputation to the
winds and slaved for a brutal plebeian; and all for
the sake of his ideals! It is most extraordinary!</p>

<p>But he seems to be mending at last, more particularly
after a lesson he had here. Can you believe
it, he called the fishermen "sir," and took off his hat
to them. In addition he indulged in cordial chats
with the natives, in order to find out "how these
people lived." The result was that the fishermen
pricked up their ears, and one of them asked me one
day whether "this Falk" paid for his own board, or
whether the doctor (I) paid for him? I told Falk
about it and it depressed him; he is always despondent,
whenever he is robbed of a delusion. A few
days later he talked to our landlord on the subject of
universal suffrage; later on our landlord asked me
whether Falk was in poor circumstances.</p>

<p>During the first few days he ran up and down the
shore like a madman. Often he swam far out into the
fjörd, as if he never meant to return again. As I
always looked upon suicide as the sacred right of every
individual, I did not interfere.</p>

<p>Isaac told me that Falk had opened his heart to him
on the subject of the girl Beda; she seems to have
made an awful fool of him.</p>

<p>A propos of Isaac! He is one of the shrewdest
fellows I ever met. He has, after one month's study,
mastered the Latin grammar, and he reads his Cæsar
as we read the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>; and what's more, he<span class="pagenum">[293]</span>
knows all about it, which we never did. His brain is
receptive, that is to say, capable of assimilating knowledge,
and in addition to this it is practical; this
combination has produced many a genius, in spite of
gross stupidity in many other respects. Every now
and then he indulges his business instincts; the other
day he gave us a brilliant example of his talent in that
direction.</p>

<p>I know nothing about his financial position&mdash;for in
that respect he is very reticent&mdash;but a little while ago
he had to pay a few hundred crowns. He was very
fidgety, and as he did not want to apply to his brother
(of the "Triton") with whom he is not on friendly terms,
he asked me to lend him the sum. I was not in a
position to do so. Thereupon he sat down, took a
sheet of note-paper, wrote a letter and sent it off by
special messenger. For a few days nothing happened.</p>

<p>In front of our cottage grew a pretty little oakwood
which shaded us from the sun and sheltered us from
the strong sea breezes. I don't know much about
trees and things pertaining to nature, but I love to sit
in the shade when the days are hot. One morning, on
pulling up my blind, I was dumbfounded; I was looking
at the open fjörd and a yacht riding at anchor
about a cable-length from the shore. Every tree had
gone, and Isaac was sitting on a stump reading
Euclid and counting the trunks as they were being
carried on board the yacht.</p>

<p>I wakened Falk; he was furious and had a quarrel
with Isaac who made a thousand crowns on the deal.
Our landlord received two hundred, all he had asked
for. I could have killed Isaac, not because he had
had the trees cut down, but because I had not thought
of it first.</p>

<p>Falk said it was unpatriotic, but Isaac swears that
the removal of the "rubbish" has improved the
view; he declares that he will take a boat next week
and visit the neighbouring islets with the same object.</p>

<p>Our landlord's wife cried all day long, but her
husband went to Dalarö to buy her a new dress; he<span class="pagenum">[294]</span>
remained away for two whole days, and when he
returned at last, he was drunk; there was nothing in
the boat, and when his wife asked for the new dress,
the fisherman confessed that he had forgotten all
about it.</p>

<p>Enough for the present. Write soon and tell me a
few new scandals, and be careful how you manipulate
the loan.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
Your deadly enemy and security,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />

H. B.<br />
</div>

<p>P.S. I read in the papers that a Civil Service Bank
is about to be established. Who is going to put
money into it? Keep an eye on it, so that we can
place a bill there when the time comes.</p>

<p>Please put the following paragraph into the <i>Grey
Bonnet</i>; it will affect my medical degree.</p>

<p>Scientific Discovery: Cand. Med. Henrik Borg,
one of our younger distinguished medical men has,
while engaged in zootomic research on the skerries
near Stockholm, discovered a new species of the
family Clypeaster, to which he has given the very
pertinent name of <i>maritimus</i>. Its characteristics may
be described as follows: Cutaneous laminæ in five
porous ambulacral shields and five interambulacral
shields, with warts instead of pricks. The animal has
excited much interest in the scientific world.<br /><br /></p>



<div style="text-align: center">
<span class="smcap">Arvid Falk</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Beda Petterson</span></div>
<div style="text-align: right">
<span class="smcap">Nämbö</span>, <i>August 18&mdash;</i><br />
</div>

<p>As I walk along the seashore and see the roadweed
growing in sand and pebbles, I think of you blossoming
for a whole winter in an inn of old Stockholm.</p>

<p>I know nothing more delightful than to lie full
length on a cliff and feel the fragments of gneiss
tickling my ribs while I gaze seaward. It makes me
feel proud, and I imagine that I am Prometheus, while
the vulture&mdash;that is you&mdash;has to lie in a feather bed in
Sandberg Street and swallow mercury.</p>

<p>Seaweed is of no use while it grows at the bottom of<span class="pagenum">[295]</span>
the sea; but when it decays on the shore it smells of
iodine which is a cure for love, and bromide, which is a
cure for insanity.</p>

<p>There was no hell until Paradise was quite complete,
that is to say until woman was created (chestnut!).</p>

<p>Far away, by the open sea, there lives a pair of
eider ducks, in an old quarter cask. If one considers
that the stretched out wings of the eider measure two
feet, it seems a miracle&mdash;and love is a miracle. The
whole world is too small for me.<br /><br /></p>



<div style="text-align: center">
<span class="smcap">Beda Petterson</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Mr. Falk</span></div>
<div style="text-align: right">
<span class="smcap">Stockholm</span>, <i>August 18&mdash;</i><br />
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Dear Frent</span>,&mdash;i have just receeved your letter, but
i cannot say that i have understood it, i see you think
that i am in Sandberg Street, but that is a grate lie
and i can undertand why that blackgard says i am,
it is a grate lie and i sware that i love you as much as
befor, i often long to see you but it canot be yet.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
Your fathfull Beda.
</div>

<p>P. S. Dear Arvid, if you could lent me 30 crowns
till the 15th, i sware i will pay it back on the 15th
becos i shall receeve money then, i have been so ill
and i am often so sad that i wish i was dead. The
barmaid in the café was a horrid creechur who was
jelous becaus of the stout Berglund and that is why i
left. All they say of me is lies i hope you are well
and dont forget your</p>

<div style="text-align: center">
The same.
</div>

<p>You can send the money to Hulda in the Café then
i shall get it.<br /><br /></p>



<div style="text-align: center">
<span class="smcap">Candidate Borg</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Journalist Struve</span></div>
<div style="text-align: right">
<span class="smcap">Nämdö</span>, <i>August 18&mdash;</i><br />
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Conservative Blackguard</span>,&mdash;You must have embezzled
the money, for instead of receiving cash, I
received a request for payment from the Shoemakers'
Bank. Do you imagine a man has a right to steal
because he has a wife and children? Render an<span class="pagenum">[296]</span>
account at once, else I shall come up to town and
make a row.</p>

<p>I have read the paragraph, which, of course, was not
without errors. It said zoologic instead of zootomic,
and Crypeaster instead of Clypeaster. Nevertheless,
I hope it will serve its purpose.</p>

<p>Falk went mad after receiving a letter in a feminine
handwriting a day or two ago. One minute he was
climbing trees, at the next he was diving to the bottom
of the sea. I expect it was the crisis&mdash;I'll talk to him
like a father a little later on.</p>

<p>Isaac has sold his yacht without asking my permission,
and for this reason we are, at the moment,
enemies. He is at present reading the second book
of Livy and founding a Fishing Company.</p>

<p>He has bought a strömming-net, a seal-gun, twenty-five
pipe stems, a salmon line, two bass-nets, a shed
for drag-nets and a&mdash;church. The latter seems incredible,
but it is quite true. I admit it was scorched
a little by the Russians in 1719, but the walls are still
standing. The parish possesses a new one which
serves the ordinary purpose; the old one was used as
a parochial store-room. Isaac is thinking of making
the Academy a present of it, in the hope of receiving
the order of Vasa.</p>

<p>The latter has been given for less. Isaac's uncle,
who is an innkeeper, received it for treating the deaf
and dumb to bread and butter and beer when they
used the riding-ground in the autumn. He did it for
six years. Then he received his reward. Now he
takes no more notice of the deaf and dumb, which
proves how fatal the order of Vasa may be under
certain circumstances.</p>

<p>Unless I drown the rascal Isaac, he won't rest until
he has bought all Sweden.</p>

<p>Pull yourself together and behave like an honourable
man, or I shall bear down upon you like Jehu, and
then you'll be lost.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
H. B.<br />
</div>

<p>P.S. When you write the notice relating to the<span class="pagenum">[297]</span>
distinguished strangers at Dalarö, mention me and
Falk, but ignore Isaac; his presence irritates me&mdash;he
went and sold his yacht.</p>

<p>Send me some blank bills (blue ones, sola-bills)
when you send the money.<br /><br /></p>



<div style="text-align: center">
<span class="smcap">Candidate Borg</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Journalist Struve</span></div>
<div style="text-align: right">
<span class="smcap">Nämdö</span>, <i>September 18&mdash;</i><br />
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Man of honour!</span>&mdash;Money arrived! Seems to
have been exchanged, for the Architects' Bank always
pays in Scanian bills of fifty. However, never mind!</p>

<p>Falk is well; he has passed the crisis like a man;
he has regained his self-confidence&mdash;a most important
quality as far as worldly success goes, but a quality
which, according to statistics is considerably weakened
in children who lose their mothers at an early age.
I gave him a prescription which he promised to try all
the more readily as the same idea had occurred to him.
He will return to his former profession, but without
accepting his brother's help&mdash;his last act of folly of
which I do not approve&mdash;re-enter society, register his
name with the rest of the cattle, become respectable,
make himself a social position, and hold his tongue
until his word bears weight.</p>

<p>The latter is absolutely necessary, if he is to remain
alive; he has a tendency to insanity, and is bound to
lose his reason unless he forgets all about these ideas
which I really cannot understand; and I don't
believe that he himself could define what it is he wants.</p>

<p>He has begun the cure and I am amazed at his
progress. I'm sure he'll end as a member of the
Royal Household.</p>

<p>That is what I believed until a few days ago when
he read in a paper an account of the Commune at
Paris. He at once had a relapse and took to climbing
trees again. He got over it, though, and now he does
not dare to look at a paper. But he never says a
word. Beware of the man when his apprenticeship
is over.<span class="pagenum">[298]</span></p>

<p>Isaac is now learning Greek. He considers the text-books
too stupid and too long; therefore he takes
them to pieces, cuts out the most important bits and
pastes them into an account book which he has
arranged like a summary for his forthcoming examinations.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, his increasing knowledge of the
classics makes him impudent and disagreeable. So,
for instance, he dared to contradict the pastor the
other day while playing a game of draughts with him,
and maintain that the Jews had invented Christianity
and that all those baptized were really Jews. Latin
and Greek have ruined him! I am afraid that I have
nursed a dragon in my hairy bosom; if this is so, then
the seed of the woman must bruise the serpent's head.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
H. B.<br />
</div>

<p>P.S. Falk has shaved his American beard and no
longer raises his hat to the fishermen.</p>

<p>You'll not hear from me again from Nämdö. We
are returning to town on Monday.<span class="pagenum">[299]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXVII" id="CHAPTER_XXVII"></a>CHAPTER XXVII</h2>

<h3>RECOVERY</h3>


<p>It was autumn again. On a clear November morning
Arvid Falk was walking from his elegantly furnished
rooms in Great Street to ... man's Boarding School
near Charles XII Market, where he had an appointment
as master of the Swedish language and history.</p>

<p>During the autumn months he had made his way
back into civilized society, a proceeding which had
brought home to him the fact that he had become a
perfect savage during his wanderings. He had discarded
his disreputable hat and bought a high one
which he found difficult, at first, to keep on his
head; he had bought gloves, but in his savagery
he had replied "fifteen" when the shopgirl asked
for his size, and blushed when his reply brought a
smile to the face of every girl in the shop.</p>

<p>The fashion had changed, since he had last bought
clothes; as he was walking through the streets, he
looked upon himself as a dandy, and every now and
then examined his reflexion in the shop windows, to
see whether his garments set well.</p>

<p>Now he was strolling up and down the pavement
before the Dramatic Theatre and waiting for the
clock on St. James' Church to strike nine; he felt
uneasy and embarrassed, as if he were a schoolboy
going to school himself; the pavement was so short,
and as again and again he retraced his footsteps he
compared himself to a dog on a chain.</p>

<p>For a moment he had a wild thought of taking a
wider range, a very much wider range, for if he
went straight on, he would come to Lill-Jans, and<span class="pagenum">[300]</span>
he remembered the spring morning when that very
pavement had led him away from society, which he
detested, into liberty, nature, and&mdash;slavery.</p>

<p>It struck nine. He stood in the corridor; the
schoolroom doors were closed; in the twilight he
saw a long row of children's garments hanging against
the wall: hats, boas, bonnets, wraps, gloves, and
muffs were lying on tables and window sills, and
whole regiments of button boots and overshoes
stood on the floor. But there was no smell of damp
clothes and wet leather as in the halls of the Parliamentary
Buildings and in the Working-men's Union
"Ph&oelig;nix," or&mdash;he became conscious of a faint odour
of newly mown hay&mdash;it seemed to come from a little
muff lined with blue silk and trimmed with tassels,
which looked like a white kitten with black dots.
He could not resist taking it in his hand and smelling
the perfume&mdash;new-mown hay&mdash;when the front door
opened and a little girl of about ten came in accompanied
by a maid.</p>

<p>She looked at the master with big fearless eyes,
and dropped a coquettish little curtsey; the almost
embarrassed master replied with a bow which made
the little beauty smile&mdash;and the maid, too. She was
late; but she was quite unconcerned and allowed her
maid to take off her outdoor garments and overshoes
as calmly as if she had come to a dance.</p>

<p>From the class-room came a sound which made his
heart beat&mdash;what was it? Ah! The organ&mdash;the
old organ! a legion of children's voices were singing
"Jesus, at the day's beginning...." He felt ill at
ease, and forced himself to fix his mind on Borg and
Isaac in order to control his feelings.</p>

<p>But matters went from bad to worse: "Our
Father, which art in Heaven...." The old prayer&mdash;it
was long ago....</p>

<p>The silence was so profound that he could hear the
raising of all the little heads and the rustling of
collars and pinafores; the doors were thrown open;
he looked at a huge, moving flower-bed composed of<span class="pagenum">[301]</span>
little girls between eight and fourteen. He felt self-conscious
like a thief caught in the act, when the
old headmistress shook hands with him; the flowers
waved to and fro, and there was much excited
whispering and exchanging of significant glances.</p>

<p>He sat down at the end of a long table, surrounded
by twenty fresh faces with sparkling eyes; twenty
children who had never experienced the bitterest of
all sorrows, the humiliations of poverty; they met
his glance boldly and inquisitively, but he was
embarrassed and had to pull himself together with
an effort; before long, however, he was on friendly
terms with Anna and Charlotte, Georgina and Lizzy
and Harry; teaching was a pleasure. He made
allowances, and let Louis XIV and Alexander be
termed great men, like all others who had been
successful; he permitted the French Revolution to
be called a terrible event, during which the noble
Louis XVI and the virtuous Marie Antoinette perished
miserably, and so on.</p>

<p>When he entered the office of the Board of Purveyance
of Hay for the Cavalry Regiments, he felt
young and refreshed. He stayed till eleven reading
the <i>Conservative</i>; then he went to the offices of the
Committee on Brandy Distilleries, lunched, and
wrote two letters, one to Borg and one to Struve.</p>

<p>On the stroke of one he was in the Department for
Death Duties. Here he collated an assessment of
property which brought him in a hundred crowns;
he had time enough before dinner to read the proofs
of the revised edition of the Forest Laws, which he
was editing.</p>

<p>It struck three. Anybody crossing the Riddarhus
Market at that time could have met on the bridge a
young, important-looking man, with pockets bulging
with manuscripts, and hands crossed on his back;
he is strolling slowly along, accompanied by an
elderly, lean, grey-haired man of fifty, the actuary
of the dead. The estate of every citizen who dies
has to be declared to him; according to the amount<span class="pagenum">[302]</span>
he takes his percentage; some say that this is his
duty; others that he represents the Earth, and has
to watch that the dead take nothing away with them,
as everything is a loan&mdash;without interest. In any
case, he is a man more interested in the dead than
the living, and therefore Falk likes his company;
he, on the other hand, is attached to Falk because,
like himself, he collects coins and autographs, and
because he possesses that excellent quality, tolerance,
which is rarely found in a young man.</p>

<p>The two friends enter the Restaurant Rosengren,
where they are fairly certain not to meet young men
and where they can discuss numismatics and autography.
They take their coffee in the Café Rydberg
and look at catalogues of coins until six. At six
o'clock the official <i>Post</i> appears, and they read the
promotions.</p>

<p>Each enjoys the other's company, for they never
quarrel. Falk is so free from fixed opinions that he
is the most amiable man in the world, liked and
appreciated by chiefs and colleagues.</p>

<p>Occasionally they dine in the Hamburg Exchange
and take a liqueur or two at the Opera Restaurant,
and to see them walking along arm in arm, at eleven
o'clock, is really quite an edifying sight.</p>

<p>Moreover, Falk has become a regular guest at
family dinners and suppers in houses into which
Borg's father has introduced him. The women find
him interesting, although they do not know how to
take him; he is always smiling and expert at
sarcastic little pleasantries.</p>

<p>But when he is sick of family life and the social
life, he visits the Red Room, and there he meets the
redoubtable Borg, his admirer Isaac, his secret enemy
and envier Struve, the man who never has any
money, and the sarcastic Sellén, who is gradually
preparing his second success, after all his imitators
have accustomed the public to his manner.</p>

<p>Lundell, who, after the completion of his altar-piece,
gave up painting sacred pictures and became a fat<span class="pagenum">[303]</span>
Epicurean, only comes to the Red Room when he
has no money to pay for his dinner; he makes a
living by portrait painting, a profession which brings
him countless invitations to dinners and suppers;
Lundell maintains that these invitations are essential
for making character studies.</p>

<p>Olle, who is still employed by the stonemason, has
become a gloomy misanthrope after his great failure
as a politician and orator. He refuses "to impose
on" his former friends and lives a solitary life.</p>

<p>Falk is in a boisterous, riotous mood whenever he
visits the Red Room, and Borg is of opinion that he
does him credit; he is a veritable <i>sappeur</i> to whom
nothing is sacred&mdash;except politics; this is a subject
on which he never touches. But if, while he lets off
his fireworks for the amusement of his friends, he
should catch, through the dense tobacco smoke, a
glimpse of the morose Olle on the other side of the
room, his mood changes, he becomes gloomy like a
night on the sea, and swallows large quantities of
strong liquor, as if he wanted to extinguish a
smouldering fire.</p>

<p>But Olle has not been seen for a long time.<span class="pagenum">[304]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXVIII" id="CHAPTER_XXVIII"></a>CHAPTER XXVIII</h2>

<h3>FROM BEYOND THE GRAVE</h3>


<p>The snow was falling lightly and silently, clothing
the street in pure white, as Falk and Sellén were
walking to the infirmary in the south-eastern suburb
of Kingsholm, to call for Borg on their way to the
Red Room.</p>

<p>"It's strange that the first snow should create an
almost solemn impression," said Sellén. "The dirty
ground is transformed to...."</p>

<p>"Are you sentimental?" scoffed Falk.</p>

<p>"Oh, no! I was merely talking from the point of
view of a landscape painter."</p>

<p>They continued their way in silence, wading
through the whirling snow.</p>

<p>"The Kingsholm with its infirmaries always strikes
me as uncanny," remarked Falk, after a pause.</p>

<p>"Are you sentimental?" scoffed Sellén.</p>

<p>"Not at all, but this part of the town always makes
that impression on me."</p>

<p>"Nonsense! It doesn't make any impression at
all; you imagine it does. Here we are, and Borg's
windows are lit up. Perhaps he's got some nice
corpses to-night."</p>

<p>They were standing before the door of the institute.
The huge building with its many dark windows glared
at them as if it were inquiring what they wanted
at that hour of the night. They passed the round
flower bed, and entered the small building on the right.</p>

<p>At the very back of the room Borg was sitting
alone in the lamplight, working at the mutilated body
of a man who had hanged himself.<span class="pagenum">[305]</span></p>

<p>"Good evening," said Borg, laying aside his
knife. "Would you like to see an old friend?"</p>

<p>He did not wait for the answer&mdash;which was not
forthcoming&mdash;but lighted a lantern, took his overcoat
and a bunch of keys.</p>

<p>"I didn't know that we had any friends here,"
said Sellén, desperately clinging to a flippant mood.</p>

<p>"Come along!" said Borg.</p>

<p>They crossed the yard and entered the large
building; the creaking door closed behind them,
and the little piece of candle, a remnant from the
last card party, threw its red, feeble glimmer on the
white walls. The two strangers tried to read Borg's
face, wondering whether he was up to some trick,
but the face was inscrutable.</p>

<p>They turned to the left and went along a passage
which echoed to their footsteps in a way which suggested
that they were being followed. Falk kept close
behind Borg and tried to keep Sellén at his back.</p>

<p>"Over there!" said Borg, standing still in the
middle of the passage.</p>

<p>Nobody could see anything but walls. But they
heard a low trickling sound, like the falling of a gentle
rain and became aware of a strange odour, resembling
the smell of a damp flower-bed or a pine-wood in
October.</p>

<p>"To the right!" said Borg.</p>

<p>The right wall was made of glass, and behind it,
on their backs, lay three white bodies.</p>

<p>Borg selected a key, opened the glass door, and
entered.</p>

<p>"Here!" he said, standing still before the second
of the three.</p>

<p>It was Olle. He lay there as quietly, with his
hands folded across his chest, as if he were taking an
afternoon nap. His drawn-up lips created the
impression that he was smiling. He was well-preserved.</p>

<p>"Drowned?" asked Sellén, who was the first to
regain his self-possession.<span class="pagenum">[306]</span></p>

<p>"Drowned," echoed Borg. "Can either of you
identify his clothes?"</p>

<p>Three miserable suits were hanging against the
wall. Sellén at once picked out the right one; a
blue jacket with sporting buttons, and a pair of
black trousers, rubbed white at the knees.</p>

<p>"Are you certain?"</p>

<p>"Ought to know my own coat&mdash;which I borrowed
from Falk."</p>

<p>Sellén drew a pocket-book from the breast pocket
of the jacket, it was saturated with water and covered
with green algæ, which Borg called enteromorph.
He opened it by the light of the lantern and examined
its contents&mdash;two or three overdue pawn-tickets and
a bundle of papers tied together, on which was
written: To him who cares to read.</p>

<p>"Have you seen enough?" asked Borg. "Then
let's go and have a drink."</p>

<p>The three mourners (friend was a word only used
by Levin and Lundell when they wanted to borrow
money) went to the nearest public-house as representatives
of the Red Room.</p>

<p>Beside a blazing fire and behind a battery of
bottles, Borg began the perusal of the papers which
Olle had left behind, but more than once he had to
have recourse to Falk's skill as an "autographer,"
for the water had washed away the words here and
there; it looked as if the writer's tears had fallen
on the sheets, as Sellén facetiously remarked.</p>

<p>"Stop talking now," said Borg, emptying his glass
of grog with a grimace which exhibited all his back
teeth; "I am going to read, and I beg of you not to
interrupt me.<br /><br/></p>



<div style="text-align: center; font-size: larger;letter-spacing: 3px"><span class="smcap">"'To Him who cares to Read.</span></div>

<p>"'I have a right to take my life, all the more so
because not only does my act not interfere with the
interests of a fellow-creature, but rather it contributes
to the happiness, as it is called, of at least<span class="pagenum">[307]</span>
one person; a place and four hundred cubic feet of
air will become vacant.</p>

<p>"'My motive is not despair, for an intelligent
individual never despairs, but I take this step with
a fairly calm conscience; that an act of this kind
throws one's mind into a certain state of excitement
will be easily understood by everybody; to postpone
it from fear of what might come hereafter is
only worthy of a slave clutching at any excuse, so
that he might stay in a world where he cannot have
suffered much. At the thought of going, a burden
seems to fall from my shoulders; I cannot fare
worse, I might fare better. If there is no life beyond
the grave, death must be happiness; as great a
happiness at least as sleep in a soft bed after hard
physical labour. Nobody who has ever observed
how sleep relaxes every muscle, and how the soul
gradually steals away, can fear death.</p>

<p>"'Why does humanity make so much ado about
death? Because it has burrowed so deeply into the
earth, that a tearing away from it is bound to be
painful. I put off from the shore long ago; I have
no family bonds, no social, national, or legal ties
which could hold me back, and I'm going simply
because life has no longer any attraction for me.</p>

<p>"'I do not want to encourage those who are well
content to follow my example; they have no reason
to do so, and therefore they cannot judge my act.
I have not considered the point whether it is cowardly
or not&mdash;to that aspect of the question I am indifferent;
moreover, it is a private matter; I never asked to
come here and therefore I have a right to go when
I please.</p>

<p>"'My reason for going? There are so many
reasons and they are so complicated that I have
neither the time nor the ability to explain them.
I will only mention the most obvious, those which
had the greatest influence on myself and on my act.</p>

<p>"'My childhood and youth were one long continuation
of manual labour; you who do not know<span class="pagenum">[308]</span>
what it means to labour from sunrise to sunset, only
to fall into a heavy sleep when the toil is over, you
have escaped the curse of the fall, for it is a curse
to feel one's spiritual growth arrested while one's
body sinks deeper and deeper into the earth. A man
who walks behind the ploughing cattle day in day
out, and sees nothing but the grey clouds, will end by
forgetting the blue sky above his head; a man who
takes a spade and digs a hole while the sun scorches
his skin, will feel that he is sinking into the parched
ground and digging a grave for his soul. You know
nothing of this, you who play all day long, and work
a little only during an idle hour between luncheon
and dinner; you who rest your spirit when the earth
is green and enjoy nature as an ennobling and
elevating spectacle. The toiler on the land never
sees the spirit of Nature. To him the field is bread,
the forest timber, the sea a wash-tub, the meadow
cheese and milk&mdash;everything is earth, soulless earth!</p>

<p>"'When I saw one-half of humanity engaged in
fostering their spiritual growth, while the other half had
merely time to attend to their bodily needs, I thought
at first that there existed two laws for two different
species of man. But my intellect denied this. My
spirit rebelled and I resolved that I, too, would escape
the curse of the fall&mdash;I became an artist.</p>

<p>"'I can analyse the much-talked-of artistic
instinct because I was endowed with it myself. It
rests on a broad base of longing for freedom, freedom
from profitable labour; for this reason a German
philosopher defined Beauty as the Unprofitable; as
soon as a work of art is of practical use, betrays a
purpose or a tendency its beauty vanishes. Further-more
the instinct rests on pride; man wants to play
God in art, not that he wants to create anything new&mdash;he
can't do that&mdash;but because he wants to improve,
to arrange, to recreate. He does not begin by admiring
his model, Nature, but by criticizing it. Everything
is full of faults and he longs to correct them.</p>

<p>"'This pride, spurring a man on to never-ceasing<span class="pagenum">[309]</span>
effort, and the freedom from work&mdash;the curse of the
fall&mdash;beget in the artist the illusion that he is standing
above his fellow creatures; to a certain extent this
is true, but unless he were constantly recalling this
fact he would find himself out, that is to say find the
unreal in his activity and the unjustifiable in his
escape from the profitable. This constant need of
appreciation of his unprofitable work makes him vain,
restless, and often deeply unhappy; as soon as he
comes to a clear understanding of himself he becomes
unproductive and goes under, for only the religious
mind can return to slavery after having once tasted
freedom.</p>

<p>"'To differentiate between genius and talent, to
look upon genius as a separate quality, is nonsense,
and argues a faith in special manifestation. The great
artist is endowed with a certain amount of ability
to acquire some kind of technical skill. Without
practice his ability dies. Somebody has said: genius
is the infinite capacity for taking pains. This is, like
so many other things, a half-truth. If culture be
added&mdash;a rare thing because knowledge makes all
things clear, and the cultured man therefore rarely
becomes an artist&mdash;and a sound intellect, the result
is genius, the natural product of a combination of
favourable circumstances.</p>

<p>"'I soon lost faith in the sublime character of my
hobby&mdash;heaven forbid that I should call it my profession&mdash;for
my art was incapable of expressing a
single idea; at the most it could represent the body
in a position expressing an emotion accompanying a
thought&mdash;or, in other words, express a thought at
third hand. It is like signalling, meaningless to all
who cannot read the signals. I only see a red flag, but
the soldier sees the word of command: Advance!
After all, even Plato, who was a fine intellectualist and
an idealist into the bargain, realized the futility of art,
calling it but the semblance of a semblance (-reality);
wherefore he excluded the artist from his ideal state.
He was in earnest!<span class="pagenum">[310]</span></p>

<p>"'I tried to find my way back into slavery, but I
could not. I tried to find in it my most sacred duty;
I tried to resign myself, but I did not succeed. My soul
was taking harm, and I was on the way to becoming a
beast; there were times when I fancied that all this
toil was a positive sin, in as far as it checked the greater
aim of spiritual development; at such times I played
truant for a day, and fled to nature, absorbed in
unspeakably blissful meditations. But then again
this bliss appeared to me in the light of a selfish pleasure
as great, greater even, than the pleasure I used to feel
in my artistic work; conscience, the sense of duty,
overtook me like a fury and drove me back to my yoke,
which then seemed beautiful&mdash;for a day.</p>

<p>"'To escape from this unbearable state of mind, and
win light and peace, I go to face the Unknown. You
who behold my dead body, say&mdash;do I look unhappy in
death?<br /><br /></p>



<div style="text-align: center; font-size: larger">"'<span class="smcap">Notes made while Walking:</span></div>

<p>"'The plan of the world is the deliverance of the
idea from the form; art, on the other hand, attempts
to imprison the idea in a sensuous form, so as to make
it visible. Therefore....</p>

<p>"'Everything corrects itself. When artistic traffic
in Florence surpassed all bounds Savonarola came&mdash;the
profound thinker! and spoke his "All this is
futile." And the artists&mdash;and what artists they were!
made a pyre of their masterpieces&mdash;Oh! Savonarola!</p>

<p>"'What was the object of the iconoclasts in Constantinople?
What did the baptists and breakers of
images want in the Netherlands? I dare not state
it for fear of being branded.</p>

<p>"'The great striving of our time: division of labour
benefits the species but sentences the individual to
death. What is the species? The conception of the
whole; the philosophers call it the idea and the
individuals believe what they say and lay down their
lives for the idea!</p>

<p>"'It is a strange thing that the will of the princes<span class="pagenum">[311]</span>
and the will of the people always clashes. Isn't
there a very simple and easy remedy?</p>

<p>"'When, at a riper age, I again read through my
school-books, I was astonished to find that we human
beings are so little removed from the beasts in the
fields. I reread Luther's Catechism in those days;
I made a few annotations, and drafted a plan for a
new Catechism. (Not to be sent in to the Commissioners;
what I am going to say now is all that I
have written.)</p>

<p>"'The first Commandment destroys the doctrine
of one God, for it assumes other gods, an assumption
granted by Christianity.</p>

<p>"'Note. Monotheism which is so highly extolled
has had an adverse influence on humanity; it has
robbed it of the love and respect for the One and True
God, by leaving Evil unexplained.</p>

<p>"'The second and third Commandments are
blasphemous; the author puts petty and stupid
commands in the mouth of the Lord; commands
which are an insult to His omniscience; if the author
were living in our days, a charge of blasphemy would
be brought against him.</p>

<p>"'The fifth Commandment should read as follows:
"Your inbred feeling of respect for your parents shall
not induce you to admire their faults; you shall not
honour them beyond their deserts; under no circumstances
do you owe your parents any gratitude; they
have not done you a service by bringing you into this
world; selfishness and the civil code of laws compel
them to clothe and feed you. The parents who
expect gratitude from their children (there are some
who even demand it) are like usurers; they are willing
to risk the capital as long as the interest is being
paid."'"</p>

<p>"'Note 1. The reason why parents (more especially
fathers) hate their children so much more
frequently than they love them arises from the fact
that the presence of children has an adverse influence
on the financial position of the parents. There are<span class="pagenum">[312]</span>
parents who treat their children as if they were shares
in a joint stock company, from which they expect
constant dividends.</p>

<p>"'Note 2. This Commandment has resulted in the
most terrible of all forms of government, in the
tyranny of the family, from which no revolution
can deliver us. There is more need for the foundation
of societies for the protection of children than for
societies for the protection of animals.</p>

<div class="center">
"'To be continued.<br /><br /><br />
</div>



<p>"'Sweden is a colony which has passed her prime,
the period when she was a great power, and like
Greece, Italy, and Spain, she is now sinking into
eternal sleep.</p>

<p>"'The terrible reaction which set in after 1865,
the year of the death of all hope, has had a demoralising
effect on the new generation. History has not
witnessed for a long time a greater indifference to the
general welfare, a greater selfishness, a greater irreligiousness.</p>

<p>"'In the world outside the nations are bellowing
with fury against oppression; but in Sweden all we
do is to celebrate jubilees.</p>

<p>"'Pietism is the sole sign of spiritual life of the
sleeping nation; it is the discontent which has thrown
itself into the arms of resignation to avoid despair
and impotent fury.</p>

<p>"'Pietists and pessimists start from the same
principle, the misery of the world, and have the same
aim: to die to the world and live to God.</p>

<p>"'The greatest sin man can commit is to be a
Conservative from selfish motives. It is an attempt
against the plan of the world for the sake of a few
shillings; the Conservative tries to stem evolution;
he plants his back against the rolling earth and says:
"Stand still!" There is but one excuse: stupidity.
Poor circumstances are no excuse, merely an explanation.</p>

<p>"'I wonder whether Norway is not going to prove<span class="pagenum">[313]</span>
a new patch on an old garment, as far as we are
concerned?'"<br /><br /></p>

<p>"Well, what do you think of it?" asked Borg
laying down the papers and drinking a small brandy.</p>

<p>"Not bad," said Sellén, "it might have been
expressed more wittily."</p>

<p>"What do you think, Falk?"</p>

<p>"The usual cry&mdash;nothing more. Shall we go now?"</p>

<p>Borg looked at him, wondering whether he was
speaking ironically, but he saw no danger-signal in
Falk's face.</p>

<p>"And so Olle has gone to happier hunting-grounds,"
said Sellén. "He's well off, need no longer
trouble about his dinner. I wonder what the head-waiter
at the 'Brass-Button' will say to it? Olle
owed him a little money."</p>

<p>"What heartlessness! What brutality! Shame
on you!" burst out Falk, throwing a few coins on the
table, and putting on his overcoat.</p>

<p>"Are you sentimental?" scoffed Sellén.</p>

<p>"Yes, I am! Good night."</p>

<p>And he had gone.<span class="pagenum">[314]</span></p>




<p class="break"></p> <h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXIX" id="CHAPTER_XXIX"></a>CHAPTER XXIX</h2>

<h3>REVUE</h3>


<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Licentiate Borg</span> at <span class="smcap">Stockholm</span> <i>to the</i> <span class="smcap">Landscape
Painter Sellén</span> at <span class="smcap">Paris</span></p>

<p><span class="smcap">Dear Sellén</span>,&mdash;You have waited a whole year for a
letter from me; now I have news to tell you. If I
were acting on my principles, I should begin with
myself; but as I had better conform to the rules of
politeness laid down by civilized society&mdash;seeing that
I am about to go out into the world to earn my own
living&mdash;I will begin with you.</p>

<p>I heartily congratulate you on the success of your
recently exhibited picture. Isaac took the notice to
the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>, and it was printed without the
knowledge of the editor, who was furious when he
read it; he had firmly made up his mind that you
should be a failure. But now that your genius has
been acknowledged abroad, you are famous at home
too, and I need no longer be ashamed of you.</p>

<p>In order to forget nothing, and to be as brief as
possible&mdash;for I am lazy as well as tired after a day's
work at the hospital&mdash;I will write my letter in the
shape of a report and the style of the <span class="smcap">Grey Bonnet</span>;
this will have the additional advantage that you can
more easily skip those parts which do not interest you.</p>

<p>The political situation is becoming
more and more interesting; all parties have corrupted
one another by presents and counter-presents, and now
all of them are grey. This reaction will probably end
in Socialism. There is a talk of increasing the number
of the districts to forty-eight, and the Ministerial
career is the one which offers the best chances of<span class="pagenum">[315]</span>
promotion, more especially as a man need not even
have passed the examination of an elementary school-teacher.
I met a school-friend the other day who is
already a pensioned Cabinet Minister; he told me
that it was far easier to become a Minister than a
secretary of one of the departments; they say the
work is very much like the work of a man who signs
guarantees&mdash;it is only a matter of a signature now
and then! It doesn't matter so much about the
payment, there is always a second guarantor.</p>

<p>The Press&mdash;well, you know the Press.
Roughly speaking it is just business, that is to say,
it always adopts the opinion of the majority, and
the majority, or, in other words, the greater number of
subscribers, is reactionary. One day I asked a
Liberal journalist how it was that he wrote in such
laudatory terms about you, of whom he knew nothing.
He said it was because public opinion, i.e. the largest
number of subscribers, was on your side.</p>

<p>"But supposing public opinion turned against
him?" I asked.</p>

<p>"Then, of course," he said, "I shall turn against
him too."</p>

<p>You will understand that under these circumstances
the whole generation which grew up after 1865, and
which is not represented in Parliament, is in despair;
and therefore they are either Nihilists&mdash;in other
words, they don't care a d&mdash;&mdash; for anything&mdash;or
they find their advantage in turning Conservative.
To be a Liberal in these days is the devil's own job.</p>

<p>The financial position is depressed.
The supply of bills, mine at least, reduced; no bank
will look at the safest bills, even if they are signed by
two doctors.</p>

<p>The "Triton" went into liquidation, as you know.
Directors and liquidators took over the printed shares,
but the shareholders and depositors received a number
of lithographed ones from the well-known society at
Norrköping, which alone managed to weather this
period of frauds and swindles. I met a widow who<span class="pagenum">[316]</span>
had a handful of papers connected with a marble
quarry; they were large, beautiful sheets, printed
in red and blue, on which 1000 Cr., 1000 Cr., was
engraved; and below the figures, just as if they were
standing security, appeared the names of well-known
persons; three of them, at least, are knights of the
Order of the Seraphim.</p>

<p>Nicholas Falk, the friend and brother, sick
of his private money-lending business, because it
detracted from the full value of his civic authority,
which is far from being the case when the business
is a public one, decided to combine with a few experts(?)
and found a bank. The novel feature of the undertaking
was expressed as follows:</p>

<p>"As experience&mdash;truly a melancholy experience"
(Levin is the author, as you may guess) "has proved
that deposit receipts are not in themselves a sufficient
guarantee for the return of deposits&mdash;that is deposited
money&mdash;we, the undersigned, actuated by unselfish
zeal for the welfare of home industry, and desirous
of giving greater security to the well-to-do public,
have founded a bank, under the title of 'Deposit
Guarantee Society Limited.' The novel and safe
feature of the enterprise&mdash;and not everything new is
safe&mdash;consists in the fact that the depositors instead
of receiving deposit receipts, are given securities to
the full value of the deposited sums, etc. etc."</p>

<p>They do a brisk business, and you may imagine
what sort of securities they issue instead of deposit
receipts.</p>

<p>Levin. Falk, with his keen eye for business,
recognized at once the great advantage to be reaped
from the services of a man with Levin's experience
and colossal knowledge of people, acquired through his
money-lending business. But to train him for all
eventualities, and make him familiar with all the
by-ways of the business, he felled him to the ground
with his promissory note, and forced him into bankruptcy.
Having done so, he appeared in the rôle of
his saviour and made him his confidential clerk with<span class="pagenum">[317]</span>
the title of secretary. And now Levin is installed in a
little private office; but on no account is he permitted
to show his face in the bank.</p>

<p>Isaac Levi is employed in the same bank as cashier.
He passed his examinations (with Latin, Greek and
Hebrew) first class in all subjects. The <i>Grey Bonnet</i>,
of course, reported his achievements. Now he is
reading for the law, and doing a little business on his
own account. He is like the eel; he has nine lives
and lives on nothing. He takes no alcohol; he does
not smoke; I don't know whether he has any vices,
but he is formidable. He has an ironmongers shop
at Hernösand, a tobacconists at Helsingförs, and a
fancy goods shop at Södertelje; in addition he owns a
few cottages at Stockholm, S. People say he is the
coming man; I say the man has come.</p>

<p>After the winding-up of the "Triton," his brother
retired with a considerable fortune, I am told, and
is now doing business privately. I heard that he
proposed buying the forest monastery near Upsala,
and rebuilding it in a new style invented by his uncle
of the Academy of Arts. But his offer was refused.
Levi, very much offended, sent a notice to the <i>Grey
Bonnet</i> under the heading: "Persecution of the Jews
in the Nineteenth Century." It won him the lively
sympathy of the whole cultured public; the affair
would win him a seat in Parliament if he cared for that
distinction. A vote of thanks was presented to him
by his co-religionists&mdash;(as if Levi had any religion)
which was printed in the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>. They thanked
him for standing up for the rights of the Jews (to buy
the forest monastery). The address was handed to
him at a banquet, to which also a great many Swedes
(I always refer the Jewish question to its rightful
domain, the ethnographical one) had been bidden, to
feast on bad salmon and uncorked wine. The deeply
moved hero of the day (vide <i>Grey Bonnet</i>) received on
the same occasion a present of 20,000 crowns (in
shares) for the foundation of a Home for Fallen
Boys of the Evangelical Denomination.<span class="pagenum">[318]</span></p>

<p>I was present at the banquet, and saw a sight I had
never seen before&mdash;I saw Isaac the worse for drink!
He shouted that he hated me, and you, and Falk, and
all "Whites"; he alternately called us "whites,"
and "natives," and <i>roche</i>; I had never heard the last
word before, but no sooner had he uttered it than a
large number of "blacks" crowded round us, looking
so ominous that Isaac thought it better to take me
into an adjoining room. There he poured out all his
soul to me; he spoke of his sufferings as a schoolboy;
of the ill-treatment to which master and school-fellows
had subjected him, the daily knocks and cuffs
from the street arabs. But what roused my indignation
more than anything else was an incident which
had happened to him during his military service; he
was called up to the front at vespers and ordered to
recite the Lord's Prayer. As he did not know it, he
was scoffed and jeered at. His account made me
change my opinion of him and his race.</p>

<p>Religious swindle and charitable fraud are more
rampant than ever, and make life in our country very
unpleasant. You will remember two imps of Satan,
Mrs. Falk and Mrs. Homan, the two pettiest, vainest
and most malicious creatures who ever idled away their
days. You know the crèche they had founded and its
end. Their latest achievement is a Home for Fallen
Women, and the first inmate&mdash;received on my recommendation&mdash;was
Marie! The poor girl had lent
all her savings to a fellow who absconded with them.
She was only too happy to find a home where
she would be kept free of charge, and be able to
retrieve her character. She told me that she did
not mind all the religious palaver, which is, unfortunately,
inseparable from an enterprise of this sort,
as long as she could count on her cup of coffee in
the morning.</p>

<p>The Rev. Skore, whom you will no doubt remember,
has not been made <i>pastor primarius</i>, and
from sheer annoyance he is begging for funds to build
a new church. Printed begging-letters, signed by all<span class="pagenum">[319]</span>
the wealthiest magnates of Sweden, are sent out to
appeal to the charitable public. The church, which
is to be three times the size of the church on the
Blasieholm and connected with a sky-high tower, is to
be built on the old site of St. Catherine's. The latter
is supposed to be too small to satisfy the great
spiritual needs from which the Swedish nation is
suffering at the moment, and is, therefore, to be pulled
down. The sum collected has already reached such
dimensions that a treasurer had to be appointed (with
free lodging and fuel). Who do you think is the
treasurer? You would never guess! Struve!</p>

<p>Struve has become somewhat religious these days&mdash;I
say <i>somewhat</i>, because it is not much&mdash;only just
enough for his position, for he is patronized by the
faithful. This does, however, not interfere with his
journalism and his drinking. But his heart is not
soft, on the contrary, he is most bitter against all
those who have not come down; between you and
me, he has very much deteriorated; therefore he
hates you and Falk, and he has sworn to slate you
next time you are heard of. He had to submit to the
marriage ceremony for the sake of the free lodging and
fuel. He was married to his wife in the White
Mountains. I was one of the witnesses. His wife,
too, has been converted, for she is under the impression
that religion is good form.</p>

<p>Lundell has left the religious sphere, and is painting
nothing but portraits of directors; he has been made
assistant at the Academy of Arts. He has also become
immortal, for he has managed to smuggle a
painting of his into the National Museum. It was
accomplished by a very simple trick and ought to
encourage imitators. Smith made a present to the
National Museum of one of Lundell's genre pictures, a
service which Lundell repaid by painting his portrait
gratis! Splendid! Isn't it?</p>

<p>The end of a romance. One Sunday morning,
at the hour when the Sabbath peace is not disturbed
by the terrible church bells, I was sitting in my room,<span class="pagenum">[320]</span>
smoking. There was a knock at the door, and a tall,
well-made man, whose face seemed familiar to me,
entered&mdash;it was Rehnhjelm. We cross-examined each
other. He is manager of a large factory and quite
satisfied with his lot.</p>

<p>Presently there was another knock. It was Falk.
(More of him later on.)</p>

<p>We revived old memories and discussed mutual
friends. But by and by there was a pause, that
strange silence which so frequently occurs after a
lively conversation. Rehnhjelm took up a book,
turned over the leaves and read out:</p>

<p>"A Cæsarean Operation: An academic treatise
which, with the permission of the illustrious medical
faculty, will be publicly discussed in the little lecture
room of the University." What horrible diagrams!
"Who in the world is the unfortunate being cursed thus
to haunt the living after his death?"</p>

<p>"You will find it on page 2," I said.</p>

<p>He went on reading.</p>

<p>"The pelvis which, as No. 38, is preserved in the
pathological collection of the Academy...." No&mdash;that
can't be it. "Agnes Rundgren, spinster...."</p>

<p>The man's face turned as white as chalk. He got
up and drank some water.</p>

<p>"Did you know the woman?" I asked, in order to
distract his thoughts.</p>

<p>"Did I know her? She was on the stage, and I
knew her at X-köping; after leaving X-köping, she
was engaged in a Stockholm café, under the name of
Beda Petterson."</p>

<p>Then you should have seen Falk! It came to a
scene which ended in Rehnhjelm's cursing all women,
and Falk, greatly excited, replying, that there were
two kinds of women, which differed from each other as
much as angels and devils. He was so moved that
Rehnhjelm's eyes filled with tears.</p>

<p>And now to Falk! I purposely left him to the last.
He is engaged to be married! How did it happen?
He himself says: "We just met one another!" <span class="pagenum">[321]</span></p>

<p>As you know, I have no rigid opinions, but cultivate
an open mind; but from what I have seen up to now,
it is undeniable that love is something of which we
bachelors know nothing&mdash;what we call love is nothing
but frivolity. You may laugh if you like, you old
scoffer!</p>

<p>Only in very bad plays have I seen such a rapid
development of character, as I had occasion to watch
in Falk. You won't be surprised to hear that his
engagement was not all plain sailing. The girl's
father, an old widower, a selfish army pensioner,
looked upon his daughter as an investment, hoping
that she would marry well and thereby secure him a
comfortable old age. (Nothing at all unusual!) He
therefore bluntly refused his consent. You should
have seen Falk! He called on the old man again and
again; he was kicked out, and yet he called again and
told the old egoist to the face that he would marry his
daughter without his consent, if he continued to
object. I am not sure, but I believe it actually came
to fisticuffs.</p>

<p>One evening Falk had accompanied his sweetheart
home. They had both spent the evening at the
house of one of the girl's relatives to whom Falk had
introduced himself. When they turned the corner of
the street in which the girl lives, they saw by the light
of the street lamp that her father was leaning out of
the window&mdash;he lives in a small house which belongs
to him. Falk knocked at the garden gate; but
nobody came to open it. At last he climbed over and
was on the other side attacked by a large dog; he got
the better of the brute and shut it up in the dust-bin.
(Imagine the nervous Falk.) Then he compelled the
porter to get up and open the gate. Now they had
gained the yard and stood before the front door. He
hammered it with a large stone, but no reply came
from within; he searched the garden and found a
ladder, by means of which he reached the old man's
window. Open the door, he shouted, or I'll smash the
window!<span class="pagenum">[322]</span></p>

<p>"If you smash the window, you rascal," yelled the
old man, "I'll shoot you!"</p>

<p>Falk immediately smashed the window.</p>

<p>For a few moments there was silence. Finally a
voice came from within the fortress:</p>

<p>"You are my man! I consent."</p>

<p>"I'm not fond of smashing windows," explained
Falk, "but there's nothing I would not do to win your
daughter."</p>

<p>The matter was settled, and they became engaged.</p>

<p>I don't know whether you know that Parliament has
carried through its reorganization of the public offices,
doubling the salaries and the number of posts, so that
a young man in the first division is now in a position to
marry. Falk is going to be married in the autumn.</p>

<p>His wife will keep her post at the school. I know
next to nothing of the Woman's Question&mdash;it doesn't
interest me&mdash;but I believe that our generation will get
rid of the last remnant of the Eastern conception
which still clings to marriage. In the days to come,
husband and wife will enter into a partnership where
both will retain their independence; they will not try
to convert each other, but will mutually respect their
weaknesses, and live together in a life-long friendship
which will never be strained by the demands of one of
the partners for amorous demonstrations.</p>

<p>I look upon Mrs. Nicholas Falk, the charitable she-devil,
as nothing more than a <i>femme entretenue</i>, and I
am sure she does so herself. Most women marry for a
home where they need not work&mdash;be their own mistress,
as it is called. The fact that marriage is on the decline
is as much the woman's fault as the man's.</p>

<p>But I cannot make Falk out. He is studying
numismatics with an almost unnatural zeal; he told
me the other day that he was engaged in writing a
text-book on numismatics, which he would endeavour
to introduce into the schools where this science is to be
taught.</p>

<p>He never reads a paper; he does not know what is
going on in the world, and he seems to have abandoned<span class="pagenum">[323]</span>
the idea of writing. He lives only for his work and
his fiancée, whom he worships.</p>

<p>But I don't trust his calm. Falk is a political
fanatic, well aware that he would be consumed if he
allowed the fire to burn freely; therefore he tries to
stifle it with hard, monotonous work; but I don't
think that he will succeed; in spite of all his restraint
the day is bound to come when he will cast aside all
self-control and burst out into fresh flames.</p>

<p>Between you and me&mdash;I believe he belongs to one
of those secret societies which are responsible for the
reaction and militarism on the Continent. Not very
long ago, at the reading of the King's Speech in
Parliament, I saw him, dressed in a purple cloak, with
a feather in his hat, sitting at the foot of the throne
(at the foot of the throne!) and I thought&mdash;no, it
would be a sin to say what I thought. But when the
Prime Minister read his Majesty's gracious propositions
respecting the state of the country and its needs,
I saw a look in Falk's eyes which plainly said: What
on earth does his Majesty know of the condition and
needs of the country?</p>

<p>That man, oh! that man!</p>

<p>I conclude my review without having forgotten
anybody. Enough for to-day. You shall soon hear
from me again.</p>

<div style="text-align: right">
H. B. 1879.<br /><br />
<span class="pagenum">[324]</span></div>



<p class="break"></p>
<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XXX" id="CHAPTER_XXX"></a>CHAPTER XXX</h2>

<h3>EPILOGUE</h3>


<p>Doubtless there is not another street in Stockholm
as ugly, and not another house as old, as dirty, and
as gloomy. The entrance gate has the inviting
appearance of a disused gallows. The rubble stones
in the yard have moved more closely together in the
course of time, so that a few small blades of grass
have been able to shoot up. The house stands by
itself, like an old hermit who has sought a solitary
spot in which to collapse. There has once been an
Assaying Office in the yard, and the outside walls are
blackened with smoke. The chinks between the
window frames and the walls are grown over, and
the house looks as if it had not washed its face or
eyes for a generation. The foundation has settled,
and the building is stooping to the left. The leaking
gutter has been weeping tears which have drawn
black furrows all over the front of the building; the
plastering is crumbling off here and there, and on
windy nights one can hear it rattling down the walls
into the street below. The house looks like an old
dowager house of poverty, recklessness, carelessness,
and vice.</p>

<p>And yet there are two people who cannot pass
through the street without stopping to look at the
miserable, frowning old building with emotion almost
amounting to love. To them the entrance gate is a
triumphal arch, the weeds and the gutter a green
meadow, and a murmuring brook, the black house a
charming ruin, containing lovely, rose-red memories.
It is more, even, for whenever they pass it, the air<span class="pagenum">[325]</span>
vibrates with music, perfumes rise from the earth,
and they see the sun shining even on the cloudiest
autumn day; there have been times when they forgot
themselves so far as to kiss each other; but
they have always been a little mad, these good
people.</p>

<p>Three years ago our young friend&mdash;we may call
him friend since he repented of his youthful errors,
apologised to society, and became a respectable
individual, serving the country and wearing purple
in the House of Parliament&mdash;our young friend, I say,
was busy on the third floor of the ugly old house with
a sheet of pins between his lips, a hammer in his
coat-pocket, and a pair of pincers under his arm; he
was standing on a ladder, putting up curtains in a
small room, furnished only with a tiny sofa, a tiny
dressing-table, a small desk, and a very small bed
with white curtains.</p>

<p>In the dining-room the faithful Isaac, in shirt-sleeves,
was engaged in spreading paste on a piece
of wallpaper, stretched on an ironing-board which
rested on two chairs; he was whistling and singing
one unknown song after the other to quite unheard-of
tunes. When he was tired of working, he prepared
luncheon on an empty box standing before the
window.</p>

<p>Outside the sun was shining into the neighbour's
garden. It was a tiny garden squeezed between
the walls of the houses; it had a pear tree in full
bloom, and two elder bushes covered with blossoms;
between the gables a piece of blue sky was visible
and the mast heads of the timber barges in the
harbour.</p>

<p>Isaac had been to the dairy; had bought sandwiches
and porter; had papered the future mistress's
room; had purchased oleanders and ivy, so that the
landing windows with their black frames should not
shock the young wife as she entered her new home;
he would have liked to paint them, but he was afraid
that she might object to the smell.<span class="pagenum">[326]</span></p>

<p>A cab stopped before the front door.</p>

<p>"It's Borg," said Isaac. "What the dickens does
he want here? And that pest, Levin, is with
him!"</p>

<p>It was a long visit, lasting ten minutes, and a disagreeable
one; but Falk bore it patiently, like any
other trial; he had for ever broken with the past;
in one respect at least; in another he was bound, for
he had been compelled during the ten minutes to
sign once more.</p>

<p>The next visitors were the sister-in-law, Mrs. Falk,
and Mrs. Homan. They found the paper in the
dining-room too dark, and the paper in the young
wife's room too light. They thought the curtains in
the husband's room were not wide enough, the carpet
a bad match to the furniture, the clock old-fashioned,
and the chandelier too dear for its plainness. One
piece of furniture in the young wife's room especially
roused their critical faculty, and gave rise to a long,
whispered conversation. They called the kitchen
black, the landing dirty, the entrance terrible; but
otherwise they said everything was quite nice, much
nicer than the yard, where there was not even a
porter, led one to expect.</p>

<p>This was the second plague, and it passed like
everything else in this world.</p>

<p>But Isaac had lost some of his gaiety after the
criticism of his wallpapers, and Falk realized for a
moment that it was a miserable hole. He opened
the windows to let out the evil spirits which had
invaded his pleasure garden. Isaac declared that
during the wedding days he would have the two
women shut up in the debtors' prison, so as to keep
them safely away.</p>

<p>And then&mdash;then she came. He was standing at
the window, and he saw her when she was still too
far off to be seen; he expected to be believed
when he maintained that she radiated light and that
the street through which she was walking was bathed
in sunshine. Of course he could have told endless<span class="pagenum">[327]</span>
stories of her kindness, sweetness, and beauty; but
not even she believed them, and it is not worth while
repeating them.</p>

<p>She entered her future home and found everything
charming. Isaac went into the kitchen to split
some wood and light the kitchen fire. Nobody missed
him until he returned with a tray bearing some cups
of chocolate. It amused him; he knew that lovers
never miss anybody in the wide world, and he found
the terrible selfishness, which is called love, a very
amiable quality; moreover, everybody admits that
it is justified.</p>

<p>"What people said about it?" They said:</p>

<p>"Well, and so Falk is married?"</p>

<p>"Is he? Whom did he marry?"</p>

<p>"A schoolmistress!"</p>

<p>"Ugh! A woman with blue spectacles and short
hair!"</p>

<p>And the questioner had all the information he
wanted.</p>

<p>If the answer had been: "He's married old
Kochstrom's daughter," the second question would
have been: "Did he get any money with her?"</p>

<p>The world asks no further questions, and everything
would be all right&mdash;if this were all. But the
world demands that a couple which has three times
given the clergyman the trouble to read the banns
and the community to listen to them; which has
forced its fellow-creatures to engage in genealogical
research and send a reporter to the wedding&mdash;the
world demands that such a couple shall be happy&mdash;woe
to it if it is not!</p>

<p>Supposing that on coming home from school, tired
with her work, angry at a slight, depressed because
some of her efforts have proved a failure, she should
meet a friend in the street who takes her hand and
says: "You don't look too happy, Elizabeth," then
woe to him!</p>

<p>Supposing that on leaving his office, in despair
because he has been overlooked instead of promoted,<span class="pagenum">[328]</span>
he should meet a friend who finds him looking
depressed, then woe to her!</p>

<p>Unhappy people, if you dare to be anything but
happy!<br /><br /></p>



<p>It was a winter evening two or three years later;
she was bending over her writing desk, correcting
copybooks, he was sitting in his room computing
assessments of property. The pens were scribbling,
the clock was ticking, and the tea-kettle singing.
Whenever he looked up from his documents at her
sweet face, she raised her eyes, their glances met, and
they nodded to each other as if they had been parted
for a long time. And they continued working.</p>

<p>But finally he grew tired of his work.</p>

<p>"Talk to me a little," he pleaded.</p>

<p>And she eagerly complied with his request.</p>

<p>"But what do they talk about?"</p>

<p>The scoffer Borg once asked that question, when
he declared matrimony to be an impossibility from
the point of view of natural science.</p>

<p>He laid down the proposition that the moment
must come when every subject had been discussed,
when each partner knew every thought and opinion
of the other, and when absolute silence was bound
to reign.</p>

<p>The fool!</p>


<h4>THE END</h4>

<p class="break"></p>


<div class="center"><span class="smcap">Printed by<br />
Ballantyne &amp; Company<br />
London ltd</span><br /></div>
<p><br /><br /></p>
<hr style="width: 45%;" />
<p><br /></p>
<div class="notebox"><p class="center">
<b>TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES</b></p>

<p>Punctuation has been normalized. And the following misprints have been
corrected:<br /><br />

Page <a href="#Page_10">10</a>; listening to the plashing [splashing] of the waves;<br />

Page <a href="#Page_38">38</a>;  their mutal [mutual] acquaintance.<br />

Page <a href="#Page_50">50</a>; took if [it] off.<br />

Page <a href="#Page_94">94</a>;  calm foosteps [footsteps].<br />

Page <a href="#Page_105">105</a>; were of [the ]opinion.<br />

Page <a href="#Page_112">112</a>; the promotor [promoter] of the Bill.<br />

Page <a href="#Page_189">189</a>;  the woman [in] question.<br />

Page <a href="#Page_213">213</a>;  Struve had diasppeared [disappeared].
</p></div>