<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
<h2><a name="CHAPTER_I" id="CHAPTER_I"></a>CHAPTER I</h2>

<h3>A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF STOCKHOLM</h3>


 <p>It was an evening in the beginning of May. The little garden on "Moses
 Height," on the south side of the town had not yet been thrown open to
 the public, and the flower-beds were still unturned. The snowdrops had
 worked through the accumulations of last year's dead leaves, and were
 on the point of closing their short career and making room for the
 crocuses which had found shelter under a barren pear tree; the elder
 was waiting for a southerly wind before bursting into bloom, but the
 tightly closed buds of the limes still offered cover for love-making to
 the chaffinches, busily employed in building their lichen-covered nests
 between trunk and branch. No human foot had trod the gravel paths since
 last winter's snow had melted, and the free and easy life of beasts and
 flowers was left undisturbed. The sparrows industriously collected all
 manner of rubbish, and stowed it away under the tiles of the Navigation
 School. They burdened themselves with scraps of the rocket-cases of
 last autumn's fireworks, and picked the straw covers off the young
 trees, transplanted from the nursery in the Deer Park only a year
 ago&mdash; nothing escaped them. They discovered shreds of muslin in
 the summer arbours; the splintered leg of a seat supplied them with
 tufts of hair left on the battlefield by dogs which had not been
 fighting there since Josephine's day. What a life it was!</p>

<p>The sun was standing over the Liljeholm, throwing
sheaves of rays towards the east; they pierced the<span class="pagenum">[2]</span>
columns of smoke of Bergsund, flashed across the
Riddarfjörd, climbed to the cross of the Riddarholms
church, flung themselves on to the steep roof of the
German church opposite, toyed with the bunting
displayed by the boats on the pontoon bridge,
sparkled in the windows of the chief custom-house,
illuminated the woods of the Liding Island, and died
away in a rosy cloud far, far away in the distance
where the sea was. And from thence the wind came
and travelled back by the same way, over Vaxholm,
past the fortress, past the custom-house and along
the Sikla Island, forcing its way in behind the
Hästarholm, glancing at the summer resorts; then
out again and on, on to the hospital Daniken; there
it took fright and dashed away in a headlong career
along the southern shore, noticed the smell of coal,
tar and fish-oil, came dead against the city quay,
rushed up to Moses Height, swept into the garden
and buffeted against a wall.</p>

<p>The wall was opened by a maid-servant, who, at
the very moment, was engaged in peeling off the
paper pasted over the chinks of the double windows;
a terrible smell of dripping, beer dregs, pine needles,
and sawdust poured out and was carried away by
the wind, while the maid stood breathing the fresh
air through her nostrils. It plucked the cotton-wool,
strewn with barberry berries, tinsel and rose leaves,
from the space between the windows and danced it
along the paths, joined by sparrows and chaffinches
who saw here the solution of the greater part of their
housing problem.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, the maid continued her work at the
double windows; in a few minutes the door leading
from the restaurant stood open, and a man, well but
plainly dressed, stepped out into the garden. There
was nothing striking about his face beyond a slight
expression of care and worry which disappeared as
soon as he had emerged from the stuffy room and
caught sight of the wide horizon. He turned to the
side from whence the wind came, opened his overcoat,<span class="pagenum">[3]</span>
and repeatedly drew a deep breath which seemed
to relieve his heart and lungs. Then he began to
stroll up and down the barrier which separated the
garden from the cliffs in the direction of the sea.</p>

<p>Far below him lay the noisy, reawakening town;
the steam cranes whirred in the harbour, the iron
bars rattled in the iron weighing machine, the
whistles of the lock-keepers shrilled, the steamers at
the pontoon bridge smoked, the omnibuses rumbled
over the uneven paving-stones; noise and uproar
in the fish market, sails and flags on the water outside;
the screams of the sea-gulls, bugle-calls from the
dockyard, the turning out of the guard, the clattering
of the wooden shoes of the working-men&mdash;all this
produced an impression of life and bustle, which
seemed to rouse the young man's energy; his face
assumed an expression of defiance, cheerfulness and
resolution, and as he leaned over the barrier and
looked at the town below, he seemed to be watching
an enemy; his nostrils expanded, his eyes flashed,
and he raised his clenched fist as if he were challenging
or threatening the poor town.</p>

<p>The bells of St. Catherine's chimed seven; the
splenetic treble of St. Mary's seconded; the basses
of the great church, and the German church joined
in, and soon the air was vibrating with the sound
made by the seven bells of the town; then one after
the other relapsed into silence, until far away in the
distance only the last one of them could be heard
singing its peaceful evensong; it had a higher note,
a purer tone and a quicker tempo than the others&mdash;yes,
it had! He listened and wondered whence the
sound came, for it seemed to stir up vague memories
in him. All of a sudden his face relaxed and his
features expressed the misery of a forsaken child.
And he was forsaken; his father and mother were
lying in the churchyard of St. Clara's, from whence
the bell could still be heard; and he was a child;
he still believed in everything, truth and fairy tales
alike.<span class="pagenum">[4]</span></p>

<p>The bell of St. Clara's was silent, and the sound of
footsteps on the gravel path roused him from his
reverie. A short man with side-whiskers came towards
him from the verandah; he wore spectacles,
apparently more for the sake of protecting his glances
than his eyes, and his malicious mouth was generally
twisted into a kindly, almost benevolent, expression.
He was dressed in a neat overcoat with defective
buttons, a somewhat battered hat, and trousers
hoisted at half-mast. His walk indicated assurance
as well as timidity. His whole appearance was so
indefinite that it was impossible to guess at his
age or social position. He might just as well have
been an artisan as a government official; his age
was anything between twenty-nine and forty-five
years. He was obviously flattered to find himself
in the company of the man whom he had come to
meet, for he raised his bulging hat with unusual
ceremony and smiled his kindliest smile.</p>

<p>"I hope you haven't been waiting, assessor?"</p>

<p>"Not for a second; it's only just struck seven.
Thank you for coming. I must confess that this
meeting is of the greatest importance to me; I might
almost say it concerns my whole future, Mr. Struve."</p>

<p>"Bless me! Do you mean it?"</p>

<p>Mr. Struve blinked; he had come to drink a glass
of toddy and was very little inclined for a serious
conversation. He had his reasons for that.</p>

<p>"We shall be more undisturbed if we have our toddy
outside, if you don't mind," continued the assessor.</p>

<p>Mr. Struve stroked his right whisker, put his hat
carefully on his head and thanked the assessor for his
invitation; but he looked uneasy.</p>

<p>"To begin with, I must ask you to drop the
'assessor,'" began the young man. "I've never
been more than a regular assistant, and I cease to be
even that from to-day; I'm Mr. Falk, nothing else."</p>

<p>"What?"</p>

<p>Mr. Struve looked as if he had lost a distinguished
friend, but he kept his temper.<span class="pagenum">[5]</span></p>

<p>"You're a man with liberal tendencies...."</p>

<p>Mr. Struve tried to explain himself, but Falk
continued:</p>

<p>"I asked you to meet me here in your character
of contributor to the liberal <i>Red Cap</i>."</p>

<p>"Good heavens! I'm such a very unimportant
contributor...."</p>

<p>"I've read your thundering articles on the working
man's question, and all other questions which nearly
concern us. We're in the year three, in Roman
figures, for it is now the third year of the new
Parliament, and soon our hopes will have become
realities. I've read your excellent biographies of our
leading politicians in the <i>Peasant's Friend</i>, the
lives of those men of the people, who have at last been
allowed to voice what oppressed them for so long;
you're a man of progress and I've a great respect for
you."</p>

<p>Struve, whose eyes had grown dull instead of
kindling at the fervent words, seized with pleasure
the proffered safety-valve.</p>

<p>"I must admit," he said eagerly, "that I'm
immensely pleased to find myself appreciated by a
young and&mdash;I must say it&mdash;excellent man like you,
assessor; but, on the other hand, why talk of such
grave, not to say sad things, when we're sitting
here, in the lap of nature, on the first day of spring,
while all the buds are bursting and the sun is pouring
his warmth on the whole creation! Let's snap our
fingers at care and drink our glass in peace. Excuse
me&mdash;I believe I'm your senior&mdash;and&mdash;I venture&mdash;to
propose therefore...."</p>

<p>Falk, who like a flint had gone out in search of steel,
realized that he had struck wood. He accepted the
proposal without eagerness. And the new brothers
sat side by side, and all they had to tell each
other was the disappointment expressed in their
faces.</p>

<p>"I mentioned a little while ago," Falk resumed,
"that I've broken to-day with my past life and<span class="pagenum">[ 6]</span>
thrown up my career as a government employé.
I'll only add that I intend taking up literature."</p>

<p>"Literature? Good Heavens! Why? Oh, but
that <i>is</i> a pity!"</p>

<p>"It isn't; but I want you to tell me how to set
about finding work."</p>

<p>"H'm! That's really difficult to say. The profession
is crowded with so many people of all sorts.
But you mustn't think of it. It really is a pity to
spoil your career; the literary profession is a bad
one."</p>

<p>Struve looked sorry, but he could not hide a certain
satisfaction at having met a friend in misfortune.</p>

<p>"But tell me," he continued, "Why are you throwing
up a career which promises a man honours as
well as influence?"</p>

<p>"Honours to those who have usurped the power,
and influence to the most unscrupulous."</p>

<p>"Stuff! It isn't really as bad as all that?"</p>

<p>"Isn't it? Well, then I must speak more plainly.
I'll show you the inner working of one of the six
departments for which I had put down. The first
five I left at once for the very simple reason that
there was no room for me. Whenever I went and
asked whether there was anything for me to do, I
was told No! And I never saw anybody doing anything.
And that was in the busy departments, like
the Committee on Brandy Distilleries, the Direct
Taxation Office and The Board of Administration of
Employés' Pensions. But when I noticed the swarming
crowd of officials, the idea struck me that the
department which had to pay out all the salaries
must surely be very busy indeed. I therefore put
my name down for the Board of Payment of Employés'
Salaries."</p>

<p>"And did you go there?" asked Struve, beginning
to feel interested.</p>

<p>"Yes. I shall never forget the great impression
made on me by my visit to this thoroughly well-organized
department. I went there at eleven<span class="pagenum">[7]</span>
o'clock one morning, because this is supposed to be
the time when the offices open. In the waiting-room
I found two young messengers sprawling on a table,
on their stomachs, reading the <i>Fatherland</i>."</p>

<p>"The '<i>Fatherland</i>'?"</p>

<p>Struve, who had up to the present been feeding
the sparrows with sugar, pricked up his ears.</p>

<p>"Yes. I said 'good morning.' A feeble wriggling
of the gentlemen's backs indicated that they accepted
my good morning without any decided displeasure;
one of them even went to the length of waggling the
heel of his right foot, which might have been intended
as a substitute for a handshake. I asked whether
either of the gentlemen were disengaged and could
show me the offices. Both of them declared that
they were unable to do so, because their orders were
not to leave the waiting-room. I inquired whether
there were any other messengers. Yes, there were
others. But the chief messenger was away on a
holiday; the first messenger was on leave; the
second was not on duty; the third had gone to the
post; the fourth was ill; the fifth had gone to fetch
some drinking water; the sixth was in the yard
'where he remained all day long'; moreover, no
official ever arrived before one o'clock. This was a
hint to me that my early, inconvenient visit was not
good form, and at the same time a reminder that the
messengers, also, were government employés.</p>

<p>"But when I stated that I was firmly resolved on
seeing the offices, so as to gain an idea of the division
of labour in so important and comprehensive a
department, the younger of the two consented to
come with me. When he opened the door I had a
magnificent view of a suite of sixteen rooms of various
sizes. There must be work here, I thought, congratulating
myself on my happy idea of coming.
The crackling of sixteen birchwood fires in sixteen
tiled stoves interrupted in the pleasantest manner
the solitude of the place."</p>

<p>Struve, who had become more and more interested<span class="pagenum">[8]</span>
fumbled for a pencil between the material and lining
of his waistcoat, and wrote "16" on his left cuff.</p>

<p>"'This is the adjuncts' room,' explained the
messenger.</p>

<p>"'I see! Are there many adjuncts in this department?'
I asked.</p>

<p>"'Oh, yes! More than enough!'"</p>

<p>"'What do they do all day long?'"</p>

<p>"'Oh! They write, of course, a little....'"</p>

<p>"He was speaking familiarly, so that I thought it
time to interrupt him. After wandering through the
copyists', the notaries', the clerk's, the controller's
and his secretary's, the reviser's and his secretary's,
the public prosecutor's, the registrar of the exchequer's,
the master of the rolls' and the librarian's,
the treasurer's, the cashier's, the procurator's, the
protonotary's, the keeper of the minutes', the
actuary's, the keeper of the records', the secretary's,
the first clerk's, and the head of the department's
rooms, we came to a door which bore in gilt letters the
words: 'The President.' I was going to open the
door but the messenger stopped me; genuinely
uneasy, he seized my arm and whispered: 'Shsh!'&mdash;'Is
he asleep?' I asked, my thoughts busy with
an old rumour. 'For God's sake, be quiet! No one
may enter here unless the president rings the bell.'
'Does he often ring?' 'No, I've never heard him
ringing in my time, and I've been here twelve
months.' He was again inclined to be familiar, so
I said no more.</p>

<p>"About noon the adjuncts began to arrive, and to
my amazement I found in them nothing but old
friends from the Committee on Brandy Distilleries,
and the Board of Administration of Employés'
Pensions. My amazement grew when the registrar
from the Inland Revenue Office strolled into the
actuary's room, and made himself as comfortable in
his easy-chair as he used to do in the Inland Revenue
Office.</p>

<p>"I took one of the young men aside and asked him<span class="pagenum">[9]</span>
whether it would not be advisable for me to call on
the president. 'Shsh!' was his mysterious reply,
while he took me into room No. 8. Again this
mysterious shsh!</p>

<p>"The room which we had just entered was quite as
dark as the rest of them, but it was much dirtier.
The horsehair stuffing was bursting through the
leather covering of the furniture; thick dust lay on
the writing-table; by the side of an inkstand, in
which the ink had dried long ago, lay an unused
stick of sealing-wax with the former owner's name
marked on it in Anglo-Saxon letters; in addition
there was a pair of paper shears whose blades were
held together by rust; a date rack which had not
been turned since midsummer five years ago; a
State directory five years old; a sheet of blotting-paper
with Julius Cæsar, Julius Cæsar, Julius Cæsar
written all over it, a hundred times at least, alternating
with as many Father Noahs.</p>

<p>"'This is the office of the Master of the Rolls; we
shall be undisturbed here,' said my friend.</p>

<p>"'Doesn't the Master of the Rolls come here, then?'
I asked.</p>

<p>"'He hasn't been here these five years, and now
he's ashamed to turn up.'</p>

<p>"'But who does his work?'</p>

<p>"'The librarian.'</p>

<p>"'But what is his work in a department like the
Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries?'</p>

<p>"'The messengers sort the receipts, chronologically
and alphabetically, and send them to the book-binders;
the librarian supervises their being placed
on shelves specially adapted for the purpose.'"</p>

<p>The conversation now seemed to amuse Struve;
he scribbled a word every now and then on his cuff,
and as Falk paused he thought it incumbent on him
to ask an important question.</p>

<p>"But how did the Master of the Rolls get his
salary?"</p>

<p>"It was sent to his private address. Wasn't that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10"></a>[10]</span>
simple enough? However, my young friend advised
me to present myself to the actuary and ask him to
introduce me to the other employés who were now
dropping in to poke the fires in their tiled stoves and
enjoy the last glimmer of the glowing wood. My
friend told me that the actuary was an influential
and good-natured individual, very susceptible to little
courtesies.</p>

<p>"I, who had come across him in his character as
Registrar of the Exchequer, had formed a different
opinion of him, but believing that my friend knew
better, I went to see him.</p>

<p>"The redoubtable actuary sat in a capacious easy-chair
with his feet on a reindeer skin. He was
engaged in seasoning a real meerschaum pipe, sewn
up in soft leather. So as not to appear idle, he
was glancing at yesterday's <i>Post</i>, acquainting
himself in this way with the wishes of the Government.</p>

<p>"My entrance seemed to annoy him; he pushed
his spectacles on to his bald head; hiding his right
eye behind the edge of the newspaper, he shot a conical
bullet at me with the left. I proffered my request.
He took the mouthpiece of his meerschaum into his
right hand and examined it to find out how far he had
coloured it. The dreadful silence which followed
confirmed my apprehensions. He cleared his throat;
there was a loud, hissing noise in the heap of glowing
coal. Then he remembered the newspaper and continued
his perusal of it. I judged it wise to repeat
my request in a different form. He lost his temper.
'What the devil do you want? What are you doing
in my room? Can't I have peace in my own
quarters? What? Get out, get out, get out! sir,
I say! Can't you see that I'm busy. Go to the
protonotary if you want anything! Don't come here
bothering me!'</p>

<p>"I went to the protonotary.</p>

<p>"The Committee of Supplies was sitting; it had
been sitting for three weeks already. The protono<span class="pagenum">[11]</span>tary
was in the chair and three clerks were keeping the
minutes. The samples sent in by the purveyors lay
scattered about on the tables, round which all disengaged
clerks, copyists and notaries were assembled.
In spite of much diversity of opinion, it had been
agreed to order twenty reams of Lessebo paper, and
after repeatedly testing their cutting capacity, the
purchase of forty-eight pairs of Grantorp scissors,
which had been awarded a prize, had been decided
on. (The actuary held twenty-five shares in this
concern.) The test writing with the steel nibs had
taken a whole week, and the minutes concerning it
had taken up two reams of paper. It was now the
turn of the penknives, and the committee was intent
on testing them on the leaves of the black table.</p>

<p>"'I propose ordering Sheffield doubleblades No. 4,
without a corkscrew,' said the protonotary, cutting
a splinter off the table large enough to light a fire
with. 'What does the first notary say?'</p>

<p>"The first notary, who had cut too deeply into the
table, had come across a nail and damaged an
Eskilstuna No. 2, with three blades, suggested buying
the latter.</p>

<p>"After everybody had given his opinion and alleged
reasons for holding it, adding practical tests, the
chairman suggested buying two gross of Sheffields.</p>

<p>"But the first notary protested, and delivered a long
speech, which was taken down on record, copied out
twice, registered, sorted (alphabetically and chronologically),
bound and placed by the messenger&mdash;under
the librarian's supervision&mdash;on a specially
adapted shelf. This protest displayed a warm,
patriotic feeling; its principal object was the
demonstration of the necessity of encouraging home
industries.</p>

<p>"But this being equivalent to a charge brought
against the Government&mdash;seeing that it was brought
against one of its employés&mdash;the protonotary felt it
his duty to meet it. He started with a historical
digression on the origin of the discount on manu<span class="pagenum">[12]</span>factured
goods&mdash;at the word discount all the adjuncts
pricked up their ears&mdash;touched on the economic
developments of the country during the last twenty
years, and went into such minute details that the
clock on the Riddarholms church struck two before
he had arrived at his subject. At the fatal stroke
of the clock the whole assembly rushed from their
places as if a fire had broken out. When I asked a
colleague what it all meant, the old notary, who had
heard my question, replied: 'The primary duty of a
Government employé is punctuality, sir!' At two
minutes past two not a soul was left in one of the rooms.</p>

<p>"'We shall have a hot day to-morrow,' whispered
a colleague, as we went downstairs. 'What in the
name of fortune is going to happen?' I asked
uneasily. 'Lead pencils,' he replied. There were
hot days in store for us. Sealing-wax, envelopes,
paper-knives, blotting-paper, string. Still, it might
all be allowed to pass, for every one was occupied.
But a day came when there was nothing to do. I
took my courage in my hands and asked for work.
I was given seven reams of paper for making fair
copies at home, a feat by which 'I should deserve
well of my country.' I did my work in a very short
time, but instead of receiving appreciation and encouragement,
I was treated with suspicion; industrious
people were not in favour. Since then I've
had no work.</p>

<p>"I'll spare you the tedious recital of a year's
humiliations, the countless taunts, the endless bitterness.
Everything which appeared small and ridiculous
to me was treated with grave solemnity, and
everything which I considered great and praiseworthy
was scoffed at. The people were called 'the mob,'
and their only use was to be shot at by the army if
occasion should arise. The new form of government
was openly reviled and the peasants were called
traitors.<a name="FNanchor_A_1" id="FNanchor_A_1"></a><a href="#Footnote_A_1" class="fnanchor">[A]"</a></p>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_A_1" id="Footnote_A_1"></a><a href="#FNanchor_A_1"><span class="label">[A]</span></a> Since the great reorganization of the public offices,
this description is no longer true to life.<span class="pagenum">[13]</span></p></div>

<p>"I had to listen to this sort of thing for seven months;
they began to suspect me because I didn't join in
their laughter, and challenged me. Next time the
'opposition dogs' were attacked, I exploded and
made a speech, the result of which was that they
knew where I stood, and that I was henceforth impossible.
And now I shall do what so many other
shipwrecks have done: I shall throw myself into the
arms of literature."</p>

<p>Struve, who seemed dissatisfied with the truncated
ending, put the pencil back, sipped his toddy and
looked absent-minded. Nevertheless, he thought he
ought to say something.</p>

<p>"My dear fellow," he remarked at last, "you
haven't yet learned the art of living; you will find
out how difficult it is to earn bread and butter, and
how it gradually becomes the main interest. One
works to eat and eats to be able to work. Believe
me, who have wife and child, that I know what I'm
talking about. You must cut your coat according
to your cloth, you see&mdash;according to your cloth.
And you've no idea what the position of a writer is.
He stands outside society."</p>

<p>"His punishment for aspiring to stand above it.
Moreover, I detest society, for it is not founded on a
voluntary basis. It's a web of lies&mdash;I renounce it
with pleasure."</p>

<p>"It's beginning to grow chilly," said Struve.</p>

<p>"Yes; shall we go?"</p>

<p>"Perhaps we'd better."</p>

<p>The flame of conversation had flickered out.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the sun had set; the half moon had
risen and hung over the fields to the north of the
town. Star after star struggled with the daylight
which still lingered in the sky; the gas-lamps were
being lighted in the town; the noise and uproar was
beginning to die away.</p>

<p>Falk and Struve walked together in the direction
of the north, talking of commerce, navigation, the
crafts, everything in fact which did not interest<span class="pagenum">[14]</span>
them; finally, to each other's relief, they
parted.</p>

<p>Falk strolled down River Street towards the dockyard,
his brain pregnant with new thoughts. He
felt like a bird which had flown against a window-pane
and now lay bruised on the ground at the very
moment when it had spread its wings to fly towards
freedom. He sat down on a seat, listening to the
splashing of the waves; a light breeze had sprung
up and rustled through the flowering maple trees,
and the faint light of the half moon shone on the
black water; twenty, thirty boats lay moored on
the quay; they tore at their chains for a moment,
raised their heads, one after the other, and dived
down again, underneath the water; wind and wave
seemed to drive them onward; they made little
runs towards the bridge like a pack of hounds, but
the chain held them in leash and left them kicking
and stamping, as if they were eager to break loose.</p>

<p>He remained in his seat till midnight; the wind
fell asleep, the waves went to rest, the fettered boats
ceased tugging at their chains; the maples stopped
rustling, and the dew was beginning to fall.</p>

<p>Then he rose and strolled home, dreaming, to his
lonely attic in the north-eastern part of the town.</p>

<p>That is what young Falk did; but old Struve,
who on the same day had become a member of the
staff of the <i>Grey Bonnet</i>, because the <i>Red Cap</i>
had sacked him, went home and wrote an article
for the notorious <i>People's Flag</i>, on the Board of
Payment of Employés' Salaries, four columns at five
crowns a column.<span class="pagenum">[15]</span></p>


<p class="break"></p>

</section></body></html>
