<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX: From Churchyard to Public-House</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">From Churchyard to Public-House</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The September afternoon lay grey and warm and still over the capital as Falk climbed the hills in the south. When he had arrived at the churchyard of <abbr>St.</abbr>В CatherineвҖҷs he sat down to rest; he noticed with a feeling of genuine pleasure that the maples had turned colour during the recent cold nights, and he welcomed autumn with its darkness, its grey clouds, and falling leaves.</p>
			<p>Not a breath stirred; it was as if Nature were resting, tired after the work of the short summer. Everything was asleep; the dead were lying beneath the sod, calm and peaceful, as if they had never been alive; he wished that he had all men there, and that he, himself, was with them.</p>
			<p>The clock on the tower chimed the hour, and he rose and continued his walk. He went down Garden Street, turned into New StreetвҒ вҖ”which looked as if it had been new a hundred years ago at leastвҒ вҖ”crossed the New Market, and came to the White Mountains.</p>
			<p>He stood still before the spotted house, listening to the childrenвҖҷs chatter, for, as usual, there were children playing about the street; they talked loudly and unreservedly while they were busy polishing little pieces of brick, presently to be used in a game of hopscotch.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat did you have for dinner, Janne?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThatвҖҷs my business!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYour business? Did you say it was your business? Mind what youвҖҷre about or youвҖҷll get a hiding.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңDonвҖҷt brag! You with your eyes!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWho shoved you into the lake the other day?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh! shut up!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Janne received a thrashing, and peace was restored.</p>
			<p>вҖңI say! You stole cress in the churchyard the other day, didnвҖҷt you, Janne?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThat cripple Olee split on me!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd you were nabbed by the police, werenвҖҷt you?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWho cares for the police? I donвҖҷt!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңDonвҖҷt you? Come along of us tonight then; weвҖҷre going to pinch some pears.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThereвҖҷs a savage dog behind the fence!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңGarn! Chimney-sweepвҖҷs PeterвҖҷll climb over and a kickвҖҷll do for the dog.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The polishing was interrupted by a maidservant who came out of the house and began to scatter pine branches on the grass-grown street.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhoвҖҷs going to be buried?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThe deputyвҖҷs wifeвҖҷs baby!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHeвҖҷs a proper old Satan, the deputy, isnвҖҷt he?вҖқ</p>
			<p>Instead of replying, the other began whistling an unknown and very peculiar tune.</p>
			<p>вҖңLetвҖҷs thrash his red-haired cubs when they come home from school! I say! DoesnвҖҷt his old woman fancy herself? The old she-devil locked us out in the snow the other night because we couldnвҖҷt pay the rent, and we had to spend the night in the barn.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The conversation flickered out; the last item of conversation had not made the smallest impression on JanneвҖҷs friend.</p>
			<p>After this introduction to the status of the tenants by the two urchins, Falk entered the house not with the pleasantest of sensations. He was received at the door by Struve, who looked distressed, and took FalkвҖҷs arm as if he were going to confide a secret to him, or suppress a tearвҒ вҖ”he had to do something, so he embraced him.</p>
			<p>Falk found himself in a big room with a dining-table, a sideboard, six chairs, and a coffin. White sheets were hanging before the windows through which the daylight filtered and broke at the red glow of the tallow candles; on the table stood a tray with green wine glasses, and a soup tureen filled with dahlias, stocks, and white asters.</p>
			<p>Struve seized FalkвҖҷs hand and led him to the coffin where the baby lay bedded on shavings, covered with tulle, and strewn with fuchsias.</p>
			<p>вҖңThere!вҖқ he said, вҖңthere!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Falk felt nothing but the quite commonplace emotion the living always feel in the presence of the dead; he could think of nothing suitable to say, and therefore he confined himself to pressing the fatherвҖҷs hand. вҖңThank you, thank you,вҖқ stammered Struve, and disappeared in an adjoining room.</p>
			<p>Falk was left alone; he could hear excited whispering behind the door through which Struve had vanished; then it grew still for a while; but presently a murmur from the other end of the room penetrated the matchboard wall. A strident treble seemed to be reciting long verses with incredible volubility.</p>
			<p>вҖң<i>BabebibobubybГӨbГ¶вҒ вҖ”BabebibobubybГӨbГ¶вҒ вҖ”BabebibobubybГӨbГ¶</i>,вҖқ it sounded.</p>
			<p>An angry manвҖҷs voice answered to the accompaniment of a plane which said <i>hwitchoвҒ вҖ”hwitchoвҒ вҖ”hwitchвҒ вҖ”hwitchвҒ вҖ”hitchвҒ вҖ”hitch</i>.</p>
			<p>And a long-drawn, rumbling <i>mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-<em>m</em>um</i> replied, seemingly anxious to calm the storm. But the plane spat and sneezed again its <i>hwitchвҒ вҖ”hwitch</i>, and immediately after a storm of <i>BabiliвҒ вҖ”bebiliвҒ вҖ”bibiliвҒ вҖ”bobiliвҒ вҖ”bubiliвҒ вҖ”bybiliвҒ вҖ”bГӨbiliвҒ вҖ”bГ¶</i>вҒ вҖ”broke out with fresh fury.</p>
			<p>Falk guessed the subject under discussion, and a certain intonation gave him the idea that the dead baby was involved in the argument.</p>
			<p>The whispering, occasionally interrupted by loud sobs, began again behind the door through which Struve had disappeared; finally it was pushed open and Struve appeared leading by the hand a woman who looked like a laundress; she was dressed in black, and her eyelids were red and swollen with weeping. Struve introduced her with all the dignity of a father of a family:</p>
			<p>вҖңMy wife, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Falk, my old friend.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Falk clasped a hand, hard as a beetle, and received a vinegary smile. He cast about for a few platitudes containing the words вҖңwifeвҖқ and вҖңgrief,вҖқ and as he was fairly successful, he was rewarded by Struve with an embrace.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve, anxious not to be left out in the cold, began brushing the back of her husbandвҖҷs coat.</p>
			<p>вҖңItвҖҷs dreadful how you seem to pick up every bit of dirt, Christian,вҖқ she said; вҖңyour backвҖҷs always dusty. DonвҖҷt you think that my husband always looks like a pig, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Falk?вҖқ</p>
			<p>There was no need for poor Falk to reply to this tender remark; behind the motherвҖҷs back now appeared two heads, regarding the visitor with a grin. The mother patted them affectionately.</p>
			<p>вҖңHave you ever seen plainer boys before, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Falk?вҖқ she asked. вҖңDonвҖҷt they look exactly like young foxes?вҖқ</p>
			<p>This statement was so undeniably accurate that Falk felt compelled to deny it eagerly.</p>
			<p>The opening of the hall door and the entrance of two men stopped all further civilities. The first of the newcomers was a man of thirty, broad-shouldered, with a square head, the front of which was supposed to represent the face; the skin looked like the half-rotten plank of a bridge in which worms have ploughed their labyrinths; the wide mouth, always slightly open, showed the four shining eyeteeth; whenever he smiled his face seemed to split into two parts; his mouth opened as far back as the fourth back tooth; not a single hair grew in the barren soil; the nose was so badly put on that one could see through it far into the head; on the upper part of the skull grew something which looked like coconut matting.</p>
			<p>Struve, who possessed the faculty of ennobling his environment, introduced Candidate Borg as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>В Borg. The latter, without a sign of either pleasure or annoyance, held out his arm to his companion, who pulled off the coat and hung it on the hinge of the front door, an act which drew from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve the remark that the old house was in such bad repair that there was not even a hall-stand.</p>
			<p>The man who had helped Borg off with his overcoat was introduced as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Levi. He was a tall, overgrown youth; the skull seemed but a backward development of the nasal bone, and the trunk which reached to the knees, looked as if it had been drawn through a wire plate, in the way in which wire is drawn; the shoulders slanted like eaves; there was no trace of hips, the shanks ran up into the thighs; the feet were worn out of shape like a pair of old shoes; the instep had given way. The legs curved outward and downward, like the legs of a working man who has carried heavy loads, or stood for the greater part of his life. He was a pure slave-type.</p>
			<p>The candidate had remained at the door; he had taken off his gloves, put down his stick, blown his nose, and put back the handkerchief into his pocket without taking the least notice of StruveвҖҷs repeated attempts to introduce him; he believed that he was still in the entrance hall; but now he took his hat, scraped the floor with his foot and made a step into the room.</p>
			<p>вҖңGood morning, Jenny! How are you?вҖқ he said, seizing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В StruveвҖҷs hand with as much eagerness as if it were a matter of life and death. He bowed, hardly perceptibly, to Falk, with the snarl of a dog who sees a strange dog in its yard.</p>
			<p>Young <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Levi followed at the heels of the candidate, responding to his smiles, applauding his sarcasms, and generally kowtowing to his superiority.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve opened a bottle of hock and filled the glasses. Struve raised his glass and welcomed his guests. The candidate opened his mouth, made a canal of his tongue, poured the contents of the glass on it, grinned as if it were physic and swallowed it.</p>
			<p>вҖңItвҖҷs awfully sour and nasty,вҖқ said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve; вҖңwould you prefer a glass of punch, Henrik?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, it <em>is</em> very nasty,вҖқ agreed the candidate, and Levi eagerly seconded him.</p>
			<p>The punch was brought in. BorgвҖҷs face brightened; he looked for a chair, and immediately Levi brought him one.</p>
			<p>The party sat down round the dining-table. The strong scent of the stocks mingled with the smell of the wine; the candles were reflected in the glasses, the conversation became lively, and soon a column of smoke stood above the candidateвҖҷs chair. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve glanced uneasily at the little sleeper near the window, but nobody saw her look.</p>
			<p>Presently a coach stopped in the street outside the house. Everybody rose except the candidate. Struve coughed, and in a low voice, as if he had something unpleasant to say, he whispered:</p>
			<p>вҖңShall we get ready now?вҖқ</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve went to the coffin and stooped over it, weeping bitterly; when, in drawing back, she saw her husband standing behind her with the coffin lid, she burst into loud sobs.</p>
			<p>вҖңThere, there, compose yourself,вҖқ said Struve, hastening to screw down the lid as if he wanted to hide something. Borg, looking like a yawning horse, gulped down another glass of punch. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Levi helped Struve to screw down the lid, displaying quite extraordinary skill; he seemed to be packing a bale of goods.</p>
			<p>The men shook hands with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve, put on their overcoats and went; the woman warned them to be careful in going downstairs; the stairs were old and rotten.</p>
			<p>Struve marched in front, carrying the coffin; when he stepped into the street and became aware of the little crowd which had collected before the house, he felt flattered, and the devil of pride took possession of him. He scolded the driver who had omitted to open the door and let down the steps; to heighten the effect of his words, he spoke with contemptuous familiarity to the tall man in livery who, hat in hand, hastened to carry out his commands.</p>
			<p>From the centre of the crowd, where the boy Janne was standing, came a short, scornful cough; but when the boy saw that he was attracting universal attention, he raised his eyes towards the chimneys, and seemed to be eagerly looking for the sweep.</p>
			<p>The door of the coach slammed behind the four men; a lively conversation broke out between some of the younger members of the mass-meeting, who now felt more at their ease.</p>
			<p>вҖңI say, what a swell coffin! Did you see it?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYes! But did you see that there was no name on it?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWasnвҖҷt there?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңNo! DidnвҖҷt you see it? It was quite plain.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhy was that, then?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңDonвҖҷt you know? Because he was a bastard.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>The whip cracked, and the coach rumbled off. FalkвҖҷs eyes strayed to the window; he caught a glimpse of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>В Struve, who had already removed some of the sheets, blowing out the candles; and he saw the two cubs standing by the side of her, each with a glass of wine in his hand.</p>
			<p>The coach rattled along, through street after street; nobody attempted to speak. Struve, sitting with the coffin on his knees, looked embarrassed; it was still daylight; he longed to make himself invisible.</p>
			<p>It was a long journey to the churchyard, but it finally came to an end. They arrived.</p>
			<p>A row of coaches stood before the gate. They bought wreaths and the gravedigger took possession of the coffin. After a lengthy walk, the small procession stopped quite at the back on the north side of the churchyard, close to a new sandfield.</p>
			<p>The gravedigger placed the coffin in position.</p>
			<p>Borg commanded:</p>
			<p>вҖңHold tight! Ease off! Let go!вҖқ</p>
			<p>And the little nameless child was lowered three yards into the ground.</p>
			<p>There was a pause; all heads were bowed and all eyes looking into the grave, as if they were waiting for something.</p>
			<p>A leaden sky gloomed dismally over the large, deserted sandfield, the white poles of which looked like the shadows of little children who had lost their way. The dark wood might have been the background in a magic lantern show; the wind was hushed.</p>
			<p>All of a sudden a voice rose, tremulous at first, but growing in clearness and intensity, as if it were speaking from an inner conviction. Levi was standing on the pall, bareheaded:</p>
			<p>вҖңIn the safe keeping of the Most High, resting in the shadow of His omnipotence, I say to the Eternal: Oh, Thou my stronghold, my defence in all eternity, my God in whom I trustвҒ вҖ”Kaddisch. Lord, Almighty God, let Thy holy name be worshipped and sanctified in the whole world. Thou wilt, in Thy own time, renew the world. Thou wilt awaken the dead and call them to a new life. Everlasting peace reigns in Thy kingdom. Give us and all Israel Thy peace. Amen.</p>
			<p>вҖңSleep soundly, little one, to whom no name had been given. He who knoweth His own will give you a name; sleep soundly in the autumn night, no evil spirits will trouble you, although you never received the holy water; rejoice that you are spared the battle of life; you can dispense with its pleasures. Count yourself happy that you were permitted to go, before you knew the world; pure and stainless your soul left its delicate tenement; therefore we will not throw earth on your coffin, for earth is an emblem of dissolution; we will bed you in flowers, for as a flower pierces the soil, so your soul shall rise from the dark grave to the light; from spirit you came, to spirit you will return.вҖқ</p>
			<p>He dropped his wreath into the little grave and covered his head. Struve took a few steps towards him, seized his hand, and shook it warmly; tears rolled down his cheeks, and he begged Levi for the loan of his handkerchief. Borg, after throwing his wreath into the grave, turned to go, and the others followed slowly.</p>
			<p>Falk stood gazing into the open grave, plunged in deep thought. At first he saw only a square of darkness; but gradually a bright spot appeared which grew and took shape; it looked like a disc and shone with the whiteness of a mirrorвҒ вҖ”it was the blank shield on which the life of the child should have been recorded. It gleamed brightly in the darkness, reflecting the unbroken daylight. He dropped his wreath. There was a faint, dull thud, and the light went out. He turned and followed the others.</p>
			<p>Arrived at the coach, there was a brief discussion. Borg cut it short.</p>
			<p>вҖңTo the Restaurant Norrbacka!вҖқ he said, briefly.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>A few minutes later the party was standing in the large room on the first floor; they were received by a girl whom Borg embraced and kissed; this done, he pushed his hat underneath the sofa, commanded Levi to help him off with his overcoat, and ordered a quart of punch, twenty-five cigars, half a pint of brandy, and a sugar-loaf. Finally he took off his coat and sat down in shirt sleeves on the only sofa in the room.</p>
			<p>StruveвҖҷs face beamed when he saw the preparations for an orgy, and he shouted for music. Levi went to the piano and strummed a waltz, while Struve put his arm into FalkвҖҷs and walked with him up and down the room. He touched lightly on life in general, on grief and joy, the inconstant nature of man, and so on, all of which went to prove that it was a sin to mourn what the godsвҒ вҖ”he said gods, because he had already said sin and did not wish to be taken for a pietistвҒ вҖ”had given and taken.</p>
			<p>This reflection was apparently made by way of an introduction to the waltz which he immediately after danced with the girl who brought the bowl.</p>
			<p>Borg filled the glasses, called Levi, nodded towards a glass, and said:</p>
			<p>вҖңLetвҖҷs drink to our brotherly love now; later on we can be as rude as we like.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Levi expressed his appreciation of the honour.</p>
			<p>вҖңYour health, Isaac!вҖқ said Borg.</p>
			<p>вҖңMy nameвҖҷs not Isaac!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat the dickens do I care what your name is? I call you Isaac, my Isaac.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYouвҖҷre a jolly devil.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңDevil! Shame on you, Jew!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWe were going to be as rude as we liked.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWe? I was, as far as you are concerned!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Struve thought he had better interfere.</p>
			<p>вҖңThank you, brother Levi, for your beautiful words,вҖқ he said. вҖңWhat prayer was that?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOur funeral prayer!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIt was beautiful!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңNothing but empty words,вҖқ interposed Borg. вҖңThe infidel dog prayed only for Israel; therefore the prayer couldnвҖҷt have been meant for the child.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAll those who are not baptized are looked upon as belonging to Israel,вҖқ replied Levi.</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd then you attacked baptism,вҖқ continued Borg. вҖңI donвҖҷt allow anybody to attack baptismвҒ вҖ”we can do that ourselves. And furthermore you attacked the doctrine of justification by faith. Leave it alone in future; I donвҖҷt permit any outsiders to attack our religion.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBorgвҖҷs right there,вҖқ said Struve; вҖңwe should draw the line at attacking either baptism or any other of the sacred truths; and I must beg of you not to indulge in any frivolous discussion of these things tonight.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYou must beg of us?вҖқ sneered Borg. вҖңMust you really? All right! IвҖҷll forgive you if youвҖҷll hold your tongue. Play something, Isaac! Music! Why is music mute at CaesarвҖҷs feast? Music! But none of your old chestnuts! Play something new!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Levi went to the piano, and played the overture to <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">The Mute</i>.</p>
			<p>вҖңNow, letвҖҷs talk,вҖқ said Borg. вҖңYou are looking depressed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Falk; have a glass with me.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Falk, who felt a certain embarrassment in BorgвҖҷs company, accepted the offer with mental reservations. But conversation languished, everybody seemed to dread a collision.</p>
			<p>Struve fluttered about like a moth in search of pleasure, but unable to find it he again and again returned to the punch-table; every now and then he danced a few steps, to keep up the fiction that the meeting was merry and festive; but this was not the case by any means.</p>
			<p>Levi seesawed between piano and punch. He attempted to sing a cheerful song, but it was so stale that nobody would listen to it.</p>
			<p>Borg talked at the top of his voice, вҖңin order to raise his spirits,вҖқ as he said, but the party grew more and more silent, one might almost have said uneasy.</p>
			<p>Falk paced up and down the room, taciturn, portentous like a thundercloud.</p>
			<p>At BorgвҖҷs order a tremendous supper, a <i xml:lang="sv">sexa</i> was served. The convives took their seats amidst ominous silence. Struve and Borg drank immoderate quantities of brandy; in the face of the latter red spots appeared here and there, and the white of the eyes looked yellow. But Struve resembled a varnished Edam cheese; he was uniformly red and greasy. Beside them Falk and Levi looked like children, eating their last supper in the society of giants.</p>
			<p>Borg looked at Levi. вҖңHand the salmon to the scandalmonger,вҖқ he commanded, in order to break the monotonous silence.</p>
			<p>Levi handed the dish to Struve. The latter pushed his spectacles on to his forehead and spat venom.</p>
			<p>вҖңShame on you, Jew,вҖқ he foamed, throwing his dinner-napkin in LeviвҖҷs face.</p>
			<p>Borg laid a heavy hand on StruveвҖҷs bald pate.</p>
			<p>вҖңSilence, you blackguard!вҖқ he said.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat dreadful company to be mixed up with! Let me tell you, gentlemen, IвҖҷm too old to be treated like a schoolboy,вҖқ said Struve, tremulously, forgetting his usual bonhomie.</p>
			<p>Borg, who had had enough to eat, rose from the table.</p>
			<p>вҖңUgh!вҖқ he said, вҖңwhat a beastly crowd you are! Pay, Isaac, IвҖҷll pay you back later on; IвҖҷm going.вҖқ</p>
			<p>He put on his overcoat, put his hat on his head, filled a tumbler with punch, added brandy to it, emptied it at one gulp, blew out some of the candles in passing, smashed a few of the glasses, pocketed a handful of cigars and a box of matches, and staggered out of the room.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat a pity that such a genius should drink like that,вҖқ said Levi solemnly.</p>
			<p>A moment later Borg reentered the room, went to the dining-table, took the candelabrum, lighted his cigar, blew the smoke into StruveвҖҷs face, put out his tongue, showed his back teeth, extinguished the lights, and departed again. Levi rolled on the floor screaming with laughter.</p>
			<p>вҖңTo what scum have you introduced me?вҖқ asked Falk gravely.</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, my dear fellow, heвҖҷs intoxicated tonight, but heвҖҷs the son of Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI didnвҖҷt ask who his father was, I asked who he was,вҖқ said Falk, cutting him short, вҖңI understand now why you allow such a dog to bully you; but can you tell me why he associates with you?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI reserve my reply to all these futilities,вҖқ answered Struve stiffly.</p>
			<p>вҖңDo reserve it, but reserve it for yourself!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhatвҖҷs the matter with you, brother Levi?вҖқ asked Struve officiously; вҖңyou look so grave.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңItвҖҷs a great pity that a genius like Borg should drink so much,вҖқ replied Levi.</p>
			<p>вҖңHow and when does he show his genius?вҖқ asked Falk.</p>
			<p>вҖңA man can be a genius without writing verse,вҖқ said Struve pointedly.</p>
			<p>вҖңI dare say; writing verse does not presuppose genius, nor is a man a genius if he behaves like a brute,вҖқ said Falk.</p>
			<p>вҖңHadnвҖҷt we better pay and go?вҖқ remarked Struve, hurrying towards the door.</p>
			<p>Falk and Levi paid. When they stepped into the street it rained and the sky was black; only the reflection of the gas-lit town faintly illuminated the sky. The coach had driven away; there was nothing left for them but to turn up their collars and walk.</p>
			<p>They had gone as far as the skittle-alley, when they were startled by terrible yells above their heads.</p>
			<p>вҖңCurse you!вҖқ screamed a voice, and looking up they saw Borg rocking himself on one of the highest branches of a lime tree. The branch nearly touched the ground, but at the next moment it described a tremendous curve upwards.</p>
			<p>вҖңOh! IsnвҖҷt it colossal!вҖқ screamed Levi. вҖңColossal!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat a madman,вҖқ smiled Struve, proud of his protГ©gГ©.</p>
			<p>вҖңCome along, Isaac!вҖқ bellowed Borg, high up in the air, вҖңcome along, Jew, letвҖҷs borrow money from each other!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHow much do you want?вҖқ asked Levi, waving his pocket book.</p>
			<p>вҖңI never borrow less than fifty!вҖқ</p>
			<p>At the next moment Borg had slid to the ground and pocketed the note.</p>
			<p>Then he took off his overcoat.</p>
			<p>вҖңPut it on again immediately!вҖқ commanded Struve.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat do you say? IвҖҷm to put it on again? Who are you to order me about? What? Do you want a fight?вҖқ</p>
			<p>He smashed his hat against the tree, took off coat and waistcoat, and let the rain beat on his shirt.</p>
			<p>вҖңCome here, you rascal! LetвҖҷs have a fight!вҖқ</p>
			<p>He seized Struve round the waist, and, staggering backwards, both of them fell into the ditch.</p>
			<p>Falk hurried away as fast as he could. And for a long time he could hear behind him outbursts of laughter and shouts of bravo. He could distinguish LeviвҖҷs voice yelling: вҖңItвҖҷs divine, itвҖҷs colossalвҒ вҖ”itвҖҷs colossal!вҖқ And BorgвҖҷs: вҖңTraitor! Traitor!вҖқ</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
