<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<p class="break"/>
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Poor Mother Country</span>
			</h2>
			<p>The clock on the Riddarholms Church struck ten as Falk arrived, a few days later, at the Parliamentary buildings to assist the representative of the Red Cap in reporting the proceedings of the Second Chamber.</p>
			<p>He hastened his footsteps, convinced that here, where the pay was good, strict punctuality would be looked upon as a matter of course. He climbed the Committee stairs and was shown to the reporters’ gallery on the left. A feeling of awe overcame him as he walked across the few boards, hung up under the roof like a pigeon house, where the men of “free speech listen to the discussion of the country’s most sacred interests by the country’s most worthy representatives.”</p>
			<p>It was a new sensation to Falk; but he was far from being impressed as he looked down from his scaffolding into the empty hall which resembled a Lancastrian school. It was five minutes past ten, but with the exception of himself, not a soul was present. All of a sudden the silence was broken by a scraping noise. A rat! he thought, but almost immediately he discovered, on the opposite gallery, across the huge, empty hall, a short, abject figure sharpening a pencil on the rail. He watched the chips fluttering down and settling on the tables below.</p>
			<p>His eyes scanned the empty walls without finding a resting-place, until finally they fell on the old clock, dating from the time of Napoleon I, with its imperial newly lit emblems, symbolical of the old story, and its hands, now pointing to ten minutes<span class="pagenum">[95]</span> past ten, symbolical in the spirit of irony⁠—of something else. At the same moment the doors in the background opened and a man entered. He was old; his shoulders stooped under the burden of public offices; his back had shrunk under the weight of communal commissions; the long continuance in damp offices, committee-rooms and safe deposits had warped his neck; there was a suggestion of the pensioner in his calm footsteps, as he walked up the cocoa-nut matting towards the chair. When he had reached the middle of the long passage and had come into line with the imperial clock, he stopped; he seemed accustomed to stopping half-way and looking round and backwards; but now he stopped to compare his watch with the clock; he shook his old, worn out head with a look of discontent: “Fast! Fast!” he murmured. His features expressed a supernatural calm and the assurance that his watch could not be slow. He continued his way with the same deliberate footsteps; he might be walking towards the goal of his life; and it was very much a question whether he had not attained it when he arrived at the venerable chair on the platform. When he was standing close by it he pulled out his handkerchief and blew his nose; his eyes roamed over the brilliant audience of chairs and tables, announcing an important event: “Gentlemen, I have blown my nose.” Then he sat down and sank into a presidential calm which might have been sleep, if it had not been waking; and, alone in the large room, as he imagined, alone with his God, he prepared to summon strength for the business of the day, when a loud scraping on the left, high up, underneath the roof, pierced the stillness; he started and turned his head to kill with a three-quarter look the rat which dared to gnaw in his presence. Falk who had omitted to take into account the resonant capacity of the pigeon house, received the deadly thrust of the murderous glance; but the glance softened as it slid down from the eaves-mouldings,<span class="pagenum">[96]</span> whispering⁠—“Only a reporter; I was afraid it might be a rat.” And deep regret stole over the murderer, contrition at the sin committed by his eye; he buried his face in his hands and⁠—wept? Oh, no! he rubbed off the spot which the appearance of a repulsive object had thrown on his retina.</p>
			<p>Presently the doors were flung wide open; the delegates were beginning to arrive, while the hands on the clock crept forward⁠—forward. The president rewarded the good with friendly nods and pressures of the hand, and punished the evil-doers by turning away his head; he was bound to be just as the Most High.</p>
			<p>The reporter of the Red Cap arrived, an unprepossessing individual, not quite sober and only half awake. In spite of this he seemed to find pleasure in answering truthfully the questions put by the newcomer.</p>
			<p>Once more the doors were flung open and in stalked a man with as much self-assurance as if he were in his own home: he was the treasurer of the Inland Revenue Office and actuary of the Board of Payment of Employés’ Salaries; he approached the chair, greeted the president like an old acquaintance and began to rummage in the papers as if they were his own.</p>
			<p>“Who’s this?” asked Falk.</p>
			<p>“The chief clerk,” answered his friend from the Red Cap.</p>
			<p>“What? Do they write here, too, then?”</p>
			<p>“Too? You’ll soon see! They keep a story full of clerks; the attics are full of clerks and they’ll soon have clerks in the cellars.”</p>
			<p>The room below was now presenting the aspect of an ant-heap. A rap of the hammer and there was silence. The head clerk read the minutes of the last meeting, and they were signed without comment. Then the same man read a petition for a fortnight’s leave, sent in by Jon Jonson from Lerbak. It was granted.<span class="pagenum">[97]</span></p>
			<p>“Do they have holidays here?” asked the novice, surprised.</p>
			<p>“Certainly, Jon Jonson wants to go home and plant his potatoes.”</p>
			<p>The platform down below was now beginning to fill with young men armed with pen and paper. All of them were old acquaintances from the time when Falk was a Government official. They took their seats at little tables as if they were going to play “Preference.”</p>
			<p>“Those are the clerks,” explained the Red Cap; “they appear to recognize you.”</p>
			<p>And they really did; they put on their eye-glasses and stared at the pigeon house with the condescension vouchsafed in a theatre by the occupants of the stalls to the occupants of the galleries. They whispered among themselves, evidently discussing an absent acquaintance who, from unmistakable evidence, must have been sitting on the chair occupied by Falk. The latter was so deeply touched by the general interest that he looked with anything but a friendly eye on Struve, who was entering the pigeon house, reserved, unembarrassed, dirty and a conservative.</p>
			<p>The chief clerk read a petition, or a resolution, to grant the necessary money for the provision of new door mats and new brass numbers on the lockers destined for the reception of overshoes.</p>
			<p>Granted!</p>
			<p>“Where is the opposition?” asked the tyro.</p>
			<p>“The devil knows!”</p>
			<p>“But they say Yes to everything!”</p>
			<p>“Wait a little and you’ll see!”</p>
			<p>“Haven’t they come yet?”</p>
			<p>“Here every one comes and goes as he pleases.”</p>
			<p>“But this is the Government Offices all over again!”</p>
			<p>The conservative Struve, who had heard the frivolous words, thought it incumbent on him to take up the cudgels for the Government.<span class="pagenum">[98]</span></p>
			<p>“What is this, little Falk is saying?” he asked. “He mustn’t growl here.”</p>
			<p>It took Falk so long to find a suitable reply that the discussions down below had started in the meantime.</p>
			<p>“Don’t mind him,” said the Red Cap, soothingly; “he’s invariably a conservative when he has the price of a dinner in his pocket, and he’s just borrowed a fiver from me.”</p>
			<p>The chief clerk was reading: 54. Report of the Committee on Ola Hipsson’s motion to remove the fences.</p>
			<p>Timber merchant Larsson from Norrland demanded acceptance as it stood. “What is to become of our forests?” he burst out. “I ask you, what <i>is</i> to become of our forests?” And he threw himself on his bench, puffing.</p>
			<p>This racy eloquence had gone out of fashion during the last few years, and the words were received with hisses, after which the puffing on the Norrland bench ceased.</p>
			<p>The representative for Oeland suggested sandstone walls; Scania’s delegate preferred box; Norbotten’s opined that fences were unnecessary where there were no fields, and a member on the Stockholm bench proposed that the matter should be referred to a Committee of experts: he laid stress on “experts.” A violent scene followed. Death rather than a committee! The question was put to the vote. The motion was rejected; the fences would remain standing until they decayed.</p>
			<p>The chief clerk was reading: 66. Report of the Committee on Carl Jönsson’s proposition to intercept the moneys for the Bible Commission. At the sound of the venerable name of an institution a hundred years old, even the smiles died away and a respectful silence ensued. Who would dare to attack religion in its very foundation, who would dare to face universal contempt? The Bishop of Ystad asked permission to speak.</p>
			<p>“Shall I write?” asked Falk.<span class="pagenum">[99]</span></p>
			<p>“No, what he says doesn’t concern us.”</p>
			<p>But the conservative Struve took down the following notes: Sacred. Int. Mother country. United names religion humanity 829, 1632. Unbelief. Mania for innovations. God’s word. Man’s word. Centen. Ansgar. Zeal. Honesty. Fairplay. Capac. Doctrine. Exist. Swed. Chch. Immemorial Swed. Honour. Gustavus I. Gustavus Adolphus. Hill Lûtzen. Eyes Europe. Verdict posterity. Mourning. Shame. Green fields. Wash my hands. They would not hear.</p>
			<p>Carl Jönsson held the floor.</p>
			<p>“Now it’s our turn!” said the Red Cap.</p>
			<p>And they wrote while Struve embroidered the Bishop’s velvet.</p>
			<p>Twaddle. Big words. Commission sat for a hundred years. Costs 100.000 Crowns. 9 archbishops. 30 Prof. Upsala. Together 500 years. Dietaries. Secretaries. Amanuenses. Done nothing. Proof sheet. Bad work. Money money money. Everything by its right name. Humbug. Official sucking-system.</p>
			<p>No one else spoke but when the question was put to the vote, the motion was accepted.</p>
			<p>While the Red Cap with practised hand smoothed Jönsson’s stumbling speech, and provided it with a strong title, Falk took a rest. Accidentally scanning the strangers’ gallery, his gaze fell on a well-known head, resting on the rail and belonging to Olle Montanus. At the moment he had the appearance of a dog, carefully watching a bone; and he was not there without a very definite reason, but Falk was in the dark. Olle was very secretive.</p>
			<p>From the end of the bench, just below the right gallery, on the very spot where the abject individual’s pencil chips had fluttered down, a man now arose. He wore a blue uniform, had a three-cornered hat tucked under his arm and held a roll of paper in his hand.</p>
			<p>The hammer fell and an ironical, malicious silence followed.<span class="pagenum">[100]</span></p>
			<p>“Write,” said the Red Cap; “take down the figures, I’ll do the rest.”</p>
			<p>“Who is it?”</p>
			<p>“These are Royal propositions.”</p>
			<p>The man in blue was reading from the paper roll: “H.M. most gracious proposition; to increase the funds of the department assisting young men of birth in the study of foreign languages, under the heading of stationery and sundry expenses, from 50.000 crowns to 56.000 crowns 37 öre.”</p>
			<p>“What are sundry expenses?” asked Falk.</p>
			<p>“Water bottles, umbrella stands, spittoons, Venetian blinds, dinners, tips and so on. Be quiet, there’s more to come!”</p>
			<p>The paper roll went on: “H.M. most gracious proposition to create sixty new commissions in the West-Gotic cavalry.”</p>
			<p>“Did he say sixty?” asked Falk, who was unfamiliar with public affairs.</p>
			<p>“Sixty, yes; write it down.”</p>
			<p>The paper roll opened out and grew bigger and bigger. “H.M. most gracious proposition to create five new regular clerkships in the Board of Payment of Employés’ Salaries.”</p>
			<p>Great excitement at the Preference tables; great excitement on Falk’s chair.</p>
			<p>Now the paper roll rolled itself up; the chairman rose and thanked the reader with a bow which plainly said: “Is there nothing else we can do?” The owner of the paper roll sat down on the bench and blew away the chips the man above him had allowed to fall down. His stiff, embroidered collar prevented him from committing the same offence which the president had perpetrated earlier in the morning.</p>
			<p>The proceedings continued. The peasant Sven Svensson asked for permission to say a few words on the Poor Law. With one accord all the reporters arose, yawned and stretched themselves.</p>
			<p>“We’ll go to lunch now,” explained the Red Cap. “We have an hour and ten minutes.” <span class="pagenum">[101]</span></p>
			<p>But Sven Svensson was speaking.</p>
			<p>The delegates began to get up from their places; two or three of them went out. The president spoke to some of the good members and by doing so expressed in the name of the Government his disapproval of all Sven Svensson might be going to say. Two older members pointed him out to a newcomer as if he were a strange beast; they watched him for a few moments, found him ridiculous and turned their backs on him.</p>
			<p>The Red Cap was under the impression that politeness required him to explain that the speaker was the “scourge” of the Chamber. He was neither hot nor cold, could be used by no party, be won for no interests, but he spoke⁠—spoke. What he spoke about no one could tell, for no paper reported him, and nobody took the trouble to look up the records; but the clerks at the tables had sworn that if they ever came into power, they would amend the laws for his sake.</p>
			<p>Falk, however, who had a certain weakness for all those who were overlooked remained behind and heard what he had not heard for many a day: a man of honour, who lived an irreproachable life, espousing the cause of the oppressed and the down-trodden while nobody listened to him.</p>
			<p>Struve, at the sight of the peasant, had taken his own departure, and had gone to a restaurant; he was quickly followed by all the reporters and half the deputies.</p>
			<p>After luncheon they returned and sat down on the narrow stairs; for a little longer they heard Sven Svensson speaking, or rather, saw him speaking, for now the conversation had become so lively that not a single word of the speech could be understood.</p>
			<p>But the speaker was bound to come to an end; nobody had any objections to make; his speech had no result whatever; it was exactly as if it had never been made.</p>
			<p>The chief clerk, who during this interval had had<span class="pagenum">[102]</span> time to go to his offices, look at the official papers, and poke his fires, was again in his place, reading: “72. Memorial of the Royal Commission on Per Ilsson’s motion to grant ten thousand crowns for the restoration of the old sculptures in the church of Träskola.”</p>
			<p>The dog’s head on the rail of the strangers’ gallery assumed a threatening aspect; he looked as if he were going to fight for his bone.</p>
			<p>“Do you know the freak up there in the gallery?” asked the Red Cap.</p>
			<p>“Olle Montanus, yes, I know him.”</p>
			<p>“Do you know that he and the church of Träskola are countrymen? He’s a shrewd fellow! Look at the expression on his face now that Träskola’s turn has come.”</p>
			<p>Per Ilsson was speaking.</p>
			<p>Struve contemptuously turned his back on the speaker and cut himself a piece of tobacco. But Falk and the Red Cap trimmed their pencils for action.</p>
			<p>“You take the flourishes, I’ll take the facts,” said the Red Cap.</p>
			<p>After the lapse of a quarter of an hour Falk’s paper was covered with the following notes.</p>
			<p>Native Culture. Social Interests. Charge of materialism. Accord. Fichte material, Native Culture not mater. Ergo charge rejected. Venerable temple. In the radiance morning sun pointing heavenwards. From heath. times Philos. never dreamt. Sacred rights. Nation. Sacred Int. Native Cult. Literature. Academy. History. Antiquity.</p>
			<p>The speech which had repeatedly called forth universal amusement especially at the exhumation of the deceased Fichte, provoked replies from the Metropolitan Bench and the bench of Upsala.</p>
			<p>The delegate on the Metropolitan bench said that although he knew neither the church of Träskola nor Fichte and doubted whether the old plaster-boys were worth ten thousand crowns, yet he thought<span class="pagenum">[103]</span> himself justified in urging the Chamber to encourage this beautiful undertaking as it was the first time the majority had asked for money for a purpose other than the building of bridges, fences, national schools, etc.</p>
			<p>The delegate on the bench of Upsala held⁠—according to Struve’s notes⁠—that the mover of the proposition was <i>à priori</i> right; that his premise, that native culture should be encouraged, was correct; that the conclusion that ten thousand crowns should be voted was binding; that the purpose, the aim, the tendency, was beautiful, praiseworthy, patriotic; but an error had certainly been committed. By whom? By the Mother country? The State? The church? No! By the proponent? The proponent was right according to common sense, and therefore the speaker⁠—he begged the Chamber to pardon the repetition⁠—could only praise the purpose, the aim, the tendency. The proposition had its warmest sympathies; he was calling on the Chamber in the name of the Mother country, in the name of art and civilization, to vote for it. But he himself felt bound to vote against it, because he was of the opinion that, conformable to the idea, it was erroneous, motiveless and figurative, as it subsumed the conception of the place under that of the State.</p>
			<p>The head in the strangers’ gallery rolled its eyes and moved its lips convulsively while the motion was put to the vote; but when the proceeding was over and the proposition had been accepted, the head disappeared in the discontented and jostling audience.</p>
			<p>Falk did not fail to understand the connexion between Per Ilsson’s proposition and Olle’s presence and disappearance. Struve, who had become even more loud and conservative after lunch, talked unreservedly of many things. The Red Cap was calm and indifferent; he had ceased to be astonished at anything.<span class="pagenum">[104]</span></p>
			<p>From the dark cloud of humanity which had been rent by Olle’s exit, suddenly broke a face, clear, bright and radiant as the sun, and Arvid Falk, whose glances had strayed to the gallery, felt compelled to cast down his eyes and turn away his head⁠—he had recognized his brother, the head of the family, the pride of the name, which he intended to make great and honourable. Behind Nicholas Falk’s shoulder half of a black face could be seen, gentle and deceitful, which seemed to whisper secrets into the ear of the fair man. Falk had only time to be surprised at his brother’s presence⁠—he knew his resentment at the new form of administration⁠—for the president had given Anders Andersson permission to state a proposition. Andersson availed himself of the permission with the greatest calm. “In view of certain events,” he read, “move that a Bill should be passed making his Majesty jointly and severally liable for all joint-stock companies whose statutes he has sanctioned.”</p>
			<p>The sun on the strangers’ gallery lost its brilliancy and a storm burst out in the Chamber.</p>
			<p>Like a flash Count Splint was on his legs:</p>
			<p>“<i>Quosque tandem, Catilina!</i> It has come to that! Members are forgetting themselves so far as to dare to criticize Government! Yes, gentlemen, criticize Government, or, what is even worse, make a joke of it; for this motion cannot be anything but a vulgar joke. Did I say joke? It is treason! Oh! My poor country! Your unworthy sons have forgotten the debt they owe you! But what else can we expect, now, that you have lost your knightly guard, your shield and your arms! I request the blackguard Per Andersson, or whatever his name may be, to withdraw his motion or, by Gad! he shall see that King and country still have loyal servants, able to pick up a stone and fling it at the head of the many-headed hydra of treason.”</p>
			<p>Applause from the strangers’ gallery; indignation in the Chamber.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_105" name="Page_105">[105]</a></span></p>
			<p>“Ha! Do you think I’m afraid?”</p>
			<p>The speaker made a gesture as if he were throwing a stone, but on every one of the hydra’s hundred faces lay a smile. Glaring round, in search of a hydra which did not smile, the speaker discovered it in the reporters’ gallery.</p>
			<p>“There! There!”</p>
			<p>He pointed to the pigeon house and in his eyes lay an expression as if he saw all hell open.</p>
			<p>“That’s the crows’ nest! I hear their croaking, but it doesn’t frighten me! Arise, men of Sweden! Cut off the tree, saw through the boards, pull down the beams, kick the chairs to pieces, break the desks into fragments, small as my little finger⁠—he held it up⁠—and then burn the blackguards until nothing of them is left. Then the kingdom will flourish in peace and its institutions will thrive. Thus speaks a Swedish nobleman! Peasants, remember his words!”</p>
			<p>This speech which three years ago would have been welcomed with acclamations, taken down verbatim and printed and circulated in national schools and other charitable institutions, was received with universal laughter. An amended version was placed on the record and, strange to say, it was only reported by the opposition papers which do not, as a rule, care to publish outbursts of this description.</p>
			<p>The Upsala bench again craved permission to speak. The speaker quite agreed with the last speaker; his acute ear had caught something of the old rattling of swords. He would like to say a few words. He would like to speak of the <i>idea</i> of a joint-stock company as an idea, but begged to be allowed to explain to the Chamber that a joint-stock company was not an accumulation of funds, not a combination of people, but a moral personality, and as such not responsible. …</p>
			<p>Shouts of laughter and loud conversation prevented the reporters from hearing the remainder of the argument, which closed with the remark that the<span class="pagenum">[106]</span> interests of the country were at stake, conformable to the idea, and that, if the motion were rejected the interests of the country would be neglected and the State in danger.</p>
			<p>Six speakers filled up the interval until dinner-time by giving extracts from the official statistics of Sweden, Nauman’s Fundamental Statutes, the Legal Textbook and the Göteberg Commercial Gazette: the conclusion invariably arrived at was that the country was in danger if his Majesty were to be jointly and severally liable for all joint-stock companies the statutes of which he had sanctioned; and that the interests of the whole country were at stake. One of the speakers was bold enough to say that the interests of the country stood on a throw of the dice; others were of the opinion that they stood on a card, others again that they hung on a thread; the last speaker said they hung on a hair.</p>
			<p>At noon the proposition to go into Committee on the motion was rejected; that was to say, there was no need for the country to go through the Committee-mill, the office-sieve, the Imperial chaff-cutter, the club-winnower and the newspaper-hubbub. The country was saved. Poor country!<span class="pagenum">[107]</span></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
